distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net (this
file was produced from scans of public domain material

the candy country

by

louisa m. alcott

author of "little women," "little men," "an old-fashioned girl,"
"aunt jo's scrap-bag," "lulu's library," etc.

illustrated

boston
little, brown, and company

_copyright, 1885,_
by louisa m. alcott

_copyright, 1900,_
by john s. p. alcott

university press
john wilson and son, cambridge, u.s.a.

*       *       *       *       *

the candy country

"i shall take mamma's red sun umbrella, it is so warm, and none of the
children at school will have one like it," said lily, one day, as she
went through the hall.

"the wind is very high; i'm afraid you'll be blown away if you carry
that big thing," called nurse from the window, as the red umbrella went
bobbing down the garden walk with a small girl under it.

"i wish it would; i always wanted to go up in a balloon," answered lily,
as she struggled out of the gate.

she got on very well till she came to the bridge and stopped to look
over the railing at the water running by so fast, and the turtles
sunning themselves on the rocks. lily was fond of throwing stones at
them; it was so funny to watch them tumble, heels over head, splash into
the water. now, when she saw three big fellows close by, she stooped for
a stone, and just at that minute a gale of wind nearly took the umbrella
out of her hand. she clutched it fast; and away she went like a
thistle-down, right up in the air, over river and hill, houses and
trees, faster and faster, till her head spun round, her breath was all
gone, and she had to let go. the dear red umbrella flew away like a
leaf; and lily fell down, down, till she went crash into a tree which
grew in such a curious place that she forgot her fright as she sat
looking about her, wondering what part of the world it could be.

the tree looked as if made of glass or colored sugar; for she could see
through the red cherries, the green leaves, and the brown branches. an
agreeable smell met her nose; and she said at once, as any child would,
"i smell candy!" she picked a cherry and ate it. oh, how good it
was!--all sugar and no stone. the next discovery was such a delightful
one that she nearly fell off her perch; for by touching her tongue here
and there, she found that the whole tree was made of candy. think what
fun to sit and break off twigs of barley sugar, candied cherries, and
leaves that tasted like peppermint and sassafras!

lily rocked and ate till she finished the top of the little tree;
then she climbed down and strolled along, making more surprising and
agreeable discoveries as she went.

what looked like snow under her feet was white sugar; the rocks were
lumps of chocolate, the flowers of all colors and tastes; and every sort
of fruit grew on these delightful trees. little white houses soon
appeared; and here lived the dainty candy-people, all made of the best
sugar, and painted to look like real people. dear little men and women,
looking as if they had stepped off of wedding cakes and bonbons, went
about in their gay sugar clothes, laughing and talking in the sweetest
voices. bits of babies rocked in open-work cradles, and sugar boys and
girls played with sugar toys in the most natural way. carriages rolled
along the jujube streets, drawn by the red and yellow barley horses we
all love so well; cows fed in the green fields, and sugar birds sang in
the trees.

lily listened, and in a moment she understood what the song said,--

"sweet! sweet!
come, come and eat,
dear little girls
with yellow curls;
for here you'll find
sweets to your mind.
on every tree
sugar-plums you'll see;
in every dell
grows the caramel.
over every wall
gum-drops fall;
molasses flows
where our river goes.
under your feet
lies sugar sweet;
over your head
grow almonds red.
our lily and rose
are not for the nose;
our flowers we pluck
to eat or suck.
and, oh! what bliss
when two friends kiss,
for they honey sip
from lip to lip!
and all you meet,
in house or street,
at work or play,
sweethearts are they.
so, little dear,
pray feel no fear;
go where you will;
eat, eat your fill.
here is a feast
from west to east;
and you can say,
ere you go away,
'at last i stand
in dear candy-land,
and no more can stuff;
for once i've enough.'
sweet! sweet!
tweet! tweet!
tweedle-dee!
tweedle-dee!"

"that is the most interesting song i ever heard," said lily, clapping
her sticky hands and dancing along toward a fine palace of white cream
candy, with pillars of striped peppermint stick, and a roof of frosting
that made it look like the milan cathedral.

"i'll live here, and eat candy all day long, with no tiresome school or
patchwork to spoil my fun," said lily.

so she ran up the chocolate steps into the pretty rooms, where all the
chairs and tables were of different colored candies, and the beds of
spun sugar. a fountain of lemonade supplied drink; and floors of
ice-cream that never melted kept people and things from sticking
together, as they would have done had it been warm.

for a long while lily was quite happy, going about tasting so many
different kinds of sweeties, talking to the little people, who were very
amiable, and finding out curious things about them and their country.

the babies were made of plain sugar, but the grown people had different
flavors. the young ladies were flavored with violet, rose, and orange;
the gentlemen were apt to have cordials of some sort inside of them, as
she found when she ate one now and then slyly, and got her tongue bitten
by the hot, strong taste as a punishment. the old people tasted of
peppermint, clove, and such comfortable things, good for pain; but the
old maids had lemon, hoar-hound, flag-root, and all sorts of sour,
bitter things in them, and did not get eaten much. lily soon learned to
know the characters of her new friends by a single taste, and some she
never touched but once. the dear babies melted in her mouth, and the
delicately flavored young ladies she was very fond of. dr. ginger was
called to her more than once when so much candy made her teeth ache, and
she found him a very hot-tempered little man; but he stopped the pain,
so she was glad to see him.

a lime-drop boy and a little pink checkerberry girl were her favorite
playmates; and they had fine times making mud-pies by scraping the
chocolate rocks and mixing this dust with honey from the wells near by.
these they could eat; and lily thought this much better than throwing
away the pies, as she had to do at home. they had candy-pulls very
often, and made swings of long loops of molasses candy, and bird's-nests
with almond eggs, out of which came birds who sang sweetly. they played
foot-ball with big bull's-eyes, sailed in sugar boats on lakes of syrup,
fished in rivers of molasses, and rode the barley horses all over the
country.

lily discovered that it never rained, but snowed white sugar. there was
no sun, as it would have been too hot; but a large yellow lozenge made
a nice moon, and red and white comfits were the stars.

the people all lived on sugar, and never quarrelled. no one was ill; and
if any got broken, as sometimes happened with such brittle creatures,
they just stuck the parts together and were all right again. the way
they grew old was to get thinner and thinner till there was danger of
their vanishing. then the friends of the old person put him in a neat
coffin, and carried him to the great golden urn which stood in their
largest temple, always full of a certain fine syrup; and here he was
dipped and dipped till he was stout and strong again, and went home to
enjoy himself for a long time as good as new.

this was very interesting to lily, and she went to many funerals. but
the weddings were better still; for the lovely white brides were so
sweet lily longed to eat them. the feasts were delicious; and everybody
went in their best clothes, and danced at the ball till they got so warm
half-a-dozen would stick together and have to be taken to the ice-cream
room to cool off. then the little pair would drive away in a fine
carriage with white horses to a new palace in some other part of the
country, and lily would have another pleasant place to visit.

but by and by, when she had seen everything, and eaten so much sweet
stuff that at last she longed for plain bread and butter, she began to
get cross, as children always do when they live on candy; and the little
people wished she would go away, for they were afraid of her. no wonder,
when she would catch up a dear sugar baby and eat him, or break some
respectable old grandmamma all into bits because she reproved her for
naughty ways. lily calmly sat down on the biggest church, crushing it
flat, and even tried to poke the moon out of the sky in a pet one day.
the king ordered her to go home; but she said, "i won't!" and bit his
head off, crown and all.

such a wail went up at this awful deed that she ran away out of the
city, fearing some one would put poison in her candy, since she had no
other food.

"i suppose i shall get somewhere if i keep walking; and i can't starve,
though i hate the sight of this horrid stuff," she said to herself, as
she hurried over the mountains of gibraltar rock that divided the city
of saccharissa from the great desert of brown sugar that lay beyond.

lily marched bravely on for a long time, and saw at last a great smoke
in the sky, smelt a spicy smell, and felt a hot wind blowing toward her.

"i wonder if there are sugar savages here, roasting and eating some poor
traveller like me," she said, thinking of robinson crusoe and other
wanderers in strange lands.

she crept carefully along till she saw a settlement of little huts very
like mushrooms, for they were made of cookies set on lumps of the brown
sugar; and queer people, looking as if made of gingerbread, were working
very busily round several stoves which seemed to bake at a great rate.

"i'll creep nearer and see what sort of people they are before i show
myself," said lily, going into a grove of spice-trees, and sitting down
on a stone which proved to be the plummy sort of cake we used to call
brighton rock.

presently one of the tallest men came striding toward the trees with a
pan, evidently after spice; and before she could run, he saw lily.

"hollo, what do you want?" he asked, staring at her with his black
currant eyes, while he briskly picked the bark off a cinnamon-tree.

"i'm travelling, and would like to know what place this is, if you
please," answered lily, very politely, being a little frightened.

"cake-land. where do you come from?" asked the gingerbread man, in a
crisp tone of voice.

"i was blown into the candy country, and have been there a long time;
but i got tired of it, and ran away to find something better."

"sensible child!" and the man smiled till lily thought his cheeks would
crumble. "you'll get on better here with us brownies than with the lazy
bonbons, who never work and are all for show. they won't own us, though
we are all related through our grandparents sugar and molasses. we are
busy folks; so they turn up their noses and don't speak when we meet at
parties. poor creatures, silly and sweet and unsubstantial! i pity 'em."

"could i make you a visit? i'd like to see how you live, and what you
do. i'm sure it must be interesting," said lily, picking herself up
after a tumble, having eaten nearly all the stone, she was so hungry.

"i know you will. come on! i can talk while i work." and the funny
gingerbread man trotted off toward his kitchen, full of pans,
rolling-pins, and molasses jugs.

"sit down. i shall be at leisure as soon as this batch is baked. there
are still some wise people down below who like gingerbread, and i have
my hands full," he said, dashing about, stirring, rolling out, and
slapping the brown dough into pans, which he whisked into the oven and
out again so fast that lily knew there must be magic about it somewhere.

every now and then he threw her a delicious cooky warm from the oven.
she liked the queer fellow, and presently began to talk, being very
curious about this country.

"what is your name, sir?"

"ginger snap."

lily thought it a good one; for he was very quick, and she fancied he
could be short and sharp if he liked.

"where does all this cake go to?" she asked, after watching the other
kitchens full of workers, who were all of different kinds of cake, and
each set of cooks made its own sort.

"i'll show you by and by," answered snap, beginning to pile up the heaps
of gingerbread on a little car that ran along a track leading to some
unknown storeroom, lily thought.

"don't you get tired of doing this all the time?"

"yes; but i want to be promoted, and i never shall be till i've done my
best, and won the prize here."

"oh, tell me about it! what is the prize, and how are you promoted? is
this a cooking-school?"

"yes; the prize for best gingerbread is a cake of condensed yeast. that
puts a soul into me, and i begin to rise till i am able to go over the
hills yonder into the blessed land of bread, and be one of the happy
creatures who are always wholesome, always needed, and without which the
world below would be in a bad way."

"bless me! that is the queerest thing i've heard yet. but i don't wonder
you want to go; i'm tired of sweets myself, and long for a good piece of
bread, though i used to want cake and candy at home."

"ah, my dear, you'll learn a good deal here; and you are lucky not to
have got into the clutches of giant dyspepsia, who always gets people if
they eat too much of such rubbish and scorn wholesome bread. i leave my
ginger behind when i go, and get white and round and beautiful, as you
will see. the gingerbread family have never been as foolish as some of
the other cakes. wedding is the worst; such extravagance in the way of
wine and spice and fruit i never saw, and such a mess to eat when it's
done! i don't wonder people get sick; serves 'em right." and snap flung
down a pan with such a bang that it made lily jump.

"sponge cake isn't bad, is it? mamma lets me eat it, but i like frosted
pound better," she said, looking over to the next kitchen, where piles
of that sort of cake were being iced.

"poor stuff. no substance. ladies' fingers will do for babies, but pound
has too much butter ever to be healthy. let it alone, and eat cookies or
seed-cakes, my dear. now, come along; i'm ready." and snap trundled away
his car-load at a great pace.

lily ran behind to pick up whatever fell, and looked about her as she
went, for this was certainly a very queer country. lakes of eggs all
beaten up, and hot springs of saleratus foamed here and there ready for
use. the earth was brown sugar or ground spice; and the only fruits were
raisins, dried currants, citron, and lemon peel. it was a very busy
place; for every one cooked all the time, and never failed and never
seemed tired, though they got so hot that they only wore sheets of paper
for clothes. there were piles of it to put over the cake, so that it
shouldn't burn; and they made cook's white caps and aprons of it, and
looked very nice. a large clock made of a flat pancake, with cloves to
mark the hours and two toothpicks for hands, showed them how long to
bake things; and in one place an ice wall was built round a lake of
butter, which they cut in lumps as they wanted it.

"here we are. now, stand away while i pitch 'em down," said snap,
stopping at last before a hole in the ground where a dumb-waiter hung
ready, with a name over it.

there were many holes all round, and many waiters, each with its name;
and lily was amazed when she read "weber," "copeland," "dooling," and
others, which she knew very well.

over snap's place was the name "newmarch;" and lily said, "why, that's
where mamma gets her hard gingerbread, and weber's is where we go for
ice-cream. do _you_ make cake for them?"

"yes, but no one knows it. it's one of the secrets of the trade. we
cook for all the confectioners, and people think the good things come
out of the cellars under their saloons. good joke, isn't it?" and snap
laughed till a crack came in his neck and made him cough.

lily was so surprised she sat down on a warm queen's cake that happened
to be near, and watched snap send down load after load of gingerbread to
be eaten by children, who would have liked it much better if they had
only known where it came from, as she did.

as she sat, the clatter of many spoons, the smell of many dinners, and
the sound of many voices calling, "one vanilla, two strawberries, and a
charlotte russe," "three stews, cup coffee, dry toast," "roast chicken
and apple without," came up the next hole, which was marked "copeland."

"dear me! it seems as if i was there," said lily, longing to hop down,
but afraid of the bump at the other end.

"i'm done. come along, i'll ride you back," called snap, tossing the
last cooky after the dumb-waiter as it went slowly out of sight with its
spicy load.

"i wish you'd teach me to cook. it looks great fun, and mamma wants me
to learn; only our cook hates to have me mess round, and is so cross
that i don't like to try at home," said lily, as she went trundling
back.

"better wait till you get to bread-land, and learn to make that. it's a
great art, and worth knowing. don't waste your time on cake, though
plain gingerbread isn't bad to have in the house. i'll teach you that in
a jiffy, if the clock doesn't strike my hour too soon," answered snap,
helping her down.

"what hour?"

"why, of my freedom. i never know when i've done my task till i'm called
by the chimes and go to get my soul," said snap, turning his currant
eyes anxiously to the clock.

"i hope you _will_ have time." and lily fell to work with all her
might, after snap had put on her a paper apron and a cap like his.

it was not hard; for when she was going to make a mistake a spark flew
out of the fire and burnt her in time to remind her to look at the
receipt, which was a sheet of gingerbread in a frame of pie-crust hung
up before her, with the directions written while it was soft and baked
in. the third sheet she made came out of the oven spicy, light, and
brown; and snap, giving it one poke, said, "that's all right. now you
know. here's your reward."

he handed her a receipt-book made of thin sheets of sugar-gingerbread
held together by a gelatine binding, with her name stamped on the back,
and each leaf crimped with a cake-cutter in the most elegant manner.

lily was charmed with it, but had no time to read all it contained; for
just then the clock began to strike, and a chime of bells to ring,--

"gingerbread,
go to the head.
your task is done;
a soul is won.
take it and go
where muffins grow,
where sweet loaves rise
to the very skies,
and biscuits fair
perfume the air.
away, away!
make no delay;
in the sea of flour
plunge this hour.
safe in your breast
let the yeast-cake rest,
till you rise in joy,
a white bread boy!"

"ha, ha! i'm free! i'm free!" cried snap, catching up the silver-covered
square that seemed to fall from heaven; and running to a great white
sea of flour, he went in head first, holding the yeast-cake clasped to
his breast as if his life depended on it.

lily watched breathlessly, while a curious working and bubbling went on,
as if snap was tumbling about down there, like a small earthquake. the
other cake-folk stood round the shore with her; for it was a great
event, and all were glad that the dear fellow was promoted so soon.
suddenly a cry was heard, and up rose a beautiful white figure on the
farther side of the sea. it moved its hand, as if saying "good-by," and
ran over the hills so fast they had only time to see how plump and fair
he was, with a little knob on the top of his head like a crown.

"he's gone to the happy land, and we shall miss him; but we'll follow
his example and soon find him again," said a gentle sponge cake, with a
sigh, as all went back to their work; while lily hurried after snap,
eager to see the new country, which was the best of all.

a delicious odor of fresh bread blew up from the valley as she stood on
the hill-top and looked down on the peaceful scene below. fields of
yellow grain waved in the breeze; hop-vines grew from tree to tree, and
many windmills whirled their white sails as they ground the different
grains into fresh, sweet meal, for the loaves of bread that built the
houses like bricks and paved the streets, or in many shapes formed the
people, furniture, and animals. a river of milk flowed through the
peaceful land, and fountains of yeast rose and fell with a pleasant foam
and fizz. the ground was a mixture of many meals, and the paths were
golden indian, which gave a very gay look to the scene. buckwheat
flowers bloomed on their rosy stems, and tall corn-stalks rustled their
leaves in the warm air that came from the ovens hidden in the hillsides;
for bread needs a slow fire, and an obliging volcano did the baking
here.

"what a lovely place!" cried lily, feeling the charm of the homelike
landscape, in spite of the funny plump people moving about.

two of these figures came running to meet her as she slowly walked down
the yellow path from the hill. one was a golden boy, with a beaming
face; the other a little girl in a shiny brown cloak, who looked as if
she would taste very nice. they each put a warm hand into lily's, and
the boy said,--

"we are glad to see you. muffin told us you were coming."

"thank you. who is muffin?" asked lily, feeling as if she had seen both
these little people before, and liked them.

"he was ginger snap once, but he's a muffin now. we begin in that way,
and work up to the perfect loaf by degrees. my name is johnny cake, and
she's sally lunn. you know us; so come on and have a race."

lily burst out laughing at the idea of playing with these old friends of
hers; and all three ran away as fast as they could tear, down the hill,
over a bridge, into the middle of the village, where they stopped,
panting, and sat down on some very soft rolls to rest.

"what do you all do _here_?" asked lily, when she got her breath again.

"we farm, we study, we bake, we brew, and are as merry as grigs all day
long. it's school-time now, and we must go; will you come?" said sally,
jumping up as if she liked it.

"our schools are not like yours; we only study two things,--grain and
yeast. i think you'll like it. we have yeast to-day, and the experiments
are very jolly," added johnny, trotting off to a tall brown tower of
rye and indian bread, where the school was kept.

lily never liked to go to school, but she was ashamed to own it; so she
went along with sally, and was so amused with all she saw that she was
glad she came. the brown loaf was hollow, and had no roof; and when she
asked why they used a ruin, sally told her to wait and see why they
chose strong walls and plenty of room overhead. all round was a circle
of very small biscuits like cushions, and on these the bread-children
sat. a square loaf in the middle was the teacher's desk, and on it lay
an ear of wheat, with several bottles of yeast well corked up. the
teacher was a pleasant, plump lady from vienna, very wise, and so famous
for her good bread that she was a professor of grainology.

when all were seated, she began with the wheat ear, and told them all
about it in such an interesting way that lily felt as if she had never
known anything about the bread she ate before. the experiments with the
yeast were quite exciting,--for fräulein pretzel showed them how it
would work till it blew the cork out, and go fizzing up to the sky if it
was kept too long; how it would turn sour or flat, and spoil the bread
if care was not taken to use it just at the right moment; and how too
much would cause the loaf to rise till there was no substance to it.

the children were very bright; for they were fed on the best kinds of
oatmeal and graham bread, with very little white bread or hot cakes to
spoil their young stomachs. hearty, happy boys and girls they were, and
their yeasty souls were very lively in them; for they danced and sang,
and seemed as bright and gay as if acidity, heaviness, and mould were
quite unknown.

lily was very happy with them, and when school was done went home with
sally and ate the best bread and milk for dinner that she ever tasted.
in the afternoon johnny took her to the cornfield, and showed her how
they kept the growing ears free from mildew and worms. then she went to
the bakehouse; and here she found her old friend muffin hard at work
making parker house rolls, for he was such a good cook he was set to
work at once on the lighter kinds of bread.

"well, isn't this better than candy-land or saccharissa?" he asked, as
he rolled and folded his bits of dough with a dab of butter tucked
inside.

"ever so much!" cried lily. "i feel better already, and mean to learn
all i can. mamma will be so pleased if i can make good bread when i go
home. she is rather old-fashioned, and likes me to be a nice
housekeeper. i didn't think bread interesting then, but i do now; and
johnny's mother is going to teach me to make indian cakes to-morrow."

"glad to hear it. learn all you can, and tell other people how to make
healthy bodies and happy souls by eating good plain food. not like this,
though these rolls are better than cake. i have to work my way up to the
perfect loaf, you know; and then, oh, then, i'm a happy thing."

"what happens then? do you go on to some other wonderful place?" asked
lily, as muffin paused with a smile on his face.

"yes; i am eaten by some wise, good human being, and become a part of
him or her. that is immortality and heaven; for i may nourish a poet and
help him sing, or feed a good woman who makes the world better for being
in it, or be crumbed into the golden porringer of a baby prince who is
to rule a kingdom. isn't that a noble way to live, and an end worth
working for?" asked muffin, in a tone that made lily feel as if some
sort of fine yeast had got into her, and was setting her brain to work
with new thoughts.

"yes, it is. i suppose all common things are made for that purpose, if
we only knew it; and people should be glad to do anything to help the
world along, even making good bread in a kitchen," answered lily, in a
sober way that showed that her little mind was already digesting the new
food it had got.

she stayed in bread-land a long time, and enjoyed and learned a great
deal that she never forgot. but at last, when she had made the perfect
loaf, she wanted to go home, that her mother might see and taste it.

"i've put a good deal of myself into it, and i'd love to think i had
given her strength or pleasure by my work," she said, as she and sally
stood looking at the handsome loaf.

"you can go whenever you like; just take the bread in your hands and
wish three times, and you'll be wherever you say. i'm sorry to have you
go, but i don't wonder you want to see your mother. don't forget what
you have learned, and you will always be glad you came to us," said
sally, kissing her good-by.

"where is muffin? i can't go without seeing him, my dear old friend,"
answered lily, looking round for him.

"he is here," said sally, touching the loaf. "he was ready to go, and
chose to pass into your bread rather than any other, for he said he
loved you and would be glad to help feed so good a little girl."

"how kind of him! i must be careful to grow wise and excellent, else he
will be disappointed and have died in vain," said lily, touched by his
devotion.

then, bidding them all farewell, she hugged her loaf close, wished three
times to be in her own home, and like a flash she was there.

whether her friends believed the wonderful tale of her adventures i
cannot tell; but i know that she was a nice little housekeeper from that
day, and made such good bread that other girls came to learn of her. she
also grew from a sickly, fretful child into a fine, strong woman,
because she ate very little cake and candy, except at christmas time,
when the oldest and the wisest love to make a short visit to
candy-land.

*       *       *       *       *

how they ran away

two little boys sat on the fence whittling arrows one fine day. said one
little boy to the other little boy,--

"let's do something jolly."

"all right. what will we do?"

"run off to the woods and be hunters."

"what can we hunt?"

"bears and foxes."

"mullin says there ain't any round here."

"well, we can shoot squirrels and snare woodchucks."

"haven't got any guns and trap."

"we've got our bows, and i found an old trap behind the barn."

"what will we eat?"

"here's our lunch; and when that's gone we can roast the squirrels and
cook the fish on a stick. i know how."

"where will you get the fire?"

"got matches in my pocket."

"i've got a lot of things we could use. let's see."

and as if satisfied at last, cautious billy displayed his treasures,
while bold tommy did the same.

besides the two knives there were strings, nails, matches, a piece of
putty, fish-hooks, and two very dirty handkerchiefs.

"there, sir, that's a first-rate fit-out for hunters; and with the jolly
basket of lunch mrs. mullin gave us, we can get on tip-top for two or
three days," said tommy, eager to be off.

"where shall we sleep?" asked billy, who liked to be comfortable both
night and day.

"oh, up in trees or on beds of leaves, like the fellows in our books. if
you are afraid, stay at home; i'm going to have no end of a good time."
and tommy crammed the things back into his pockets as if there were no
time to lose.

"pooh! i ain't afraid. come on!" and jumping down billy caught up his
rod, rather ashamed of his many questions.

no one was looking at them, and they might have walked quietly off; but
that the "running away" might be all right, both raced down the road,
tumbled over a wall, and dashed into the woods as if a whole tribe of
wild indians were after them.

"do you know the way?" panted billy, when at last they stopped for
breath.

"yes, it winds right up the mountain; but we'd better not keep to it, or
some one will see us and take us back. we are going to be _real_ hunters
and have adventures; so we must get lost, and find our way by the sun
and the stars," answered tommy, who had read so many boys' books his
little head was a jumble of texan rangers, african explorers, and
buffalo bills; and he burned to outdo them all.

"what will our mothers say if we really get lost?" asked billy, always
ready with a question.

"mine won't fuss. she lets me do what i like."

that was true; for tommy's poor mamma was tired of trying to keep the
lively little fellow in order, and had got used to seeing him come out
of all his scrapes without much harm.

"mine will be scared; she's always afraid i'm going to get hurt, so i'm
careful. but i guess i'll risk it, and have some fun to tell about when
we go home," said billy, trudging after captain tommy, who always took
the lead.

these eleven-year-old boys were staying with their mothers at a
farm-house up among the mountains; and having got tired of the tame
bears, the big barn, the trout brook, the thirty colts at pasture, and
the society of the few little girls and younger boys at the hotel near
by, these fine fellows longed to break loose and "rough it in the bush,"
as the hunters did in their favorite stories.

away they went, deeper and deeper into the great forest that covered the
side of the mountain. a pleasant place that august day; for it was cool
and green, with many brooks splashing over the rocks, or lying in brown
pools under the ferns. squirrels chattered and raced in the tall pines;
now and then a gray rabbit skipped out of sight among the brakes, or a
strange bird flew by. here and there blackberries grew in the open
places, sassafras bushes were plentiful, and black-birch bark was ready
for chewing.

"don't you call this nice?" asked tommy, pausing at last in a little
dell where a noisy brook came tumbling down the mountain side, and the
pines sung overhead.

"yes; but i'm awful hungry. let's rest and eat our lunch," said billy,
sitting down on a cushion of moss.

"you always want to be stuffing and resting," answered sturdy tommy, who
liked to be moving all the time.

he took the fishing-basket, which hung over his shoulder by a strap, and
opened it carefully; for good mrs. mullin had packed a nice lunch of
bread and butter, cake and peaches, with a bottle of milk, and two large
pickles slipped in on the sly to please the boys.

tommy's face grew very sober as he looked in, for all he saw was a box
of worms for bait and an old jacket.

"by george! we've got the wrong basket. this is mullin's, and he's gone
off with our prog. won't he be mad?"

"not as mad as i am. why didn't you look? you are always in such a hurry
to start. what _shall_ we do now without anything to eat?" whined billy;
for losing his lunch was a dreadful blow to him.

"we shall have to catch some fish and eat blackberries. which will you
do, old cry-baby?" said tommy, laughing at the other boy's dismal face.

"i'll fish; i'm so tired i can't go scratching round after berries. i
don't love 'em either." and billy began to fix his line and bait his
hook.

"lucky we got the worms; you can eat 'em if you can't wait for fish,"
said tommy, bustling about to empty the basket and pile up their few
possessions in a heap. "there's a quiet pool below here, you go and fish
there. i'll pick the berries, and then show you how to get dinner in the
woods. this is our camp; so fly round and do your best."

then tommy ran off to a place near by where he had seen the berries,
while billy found a comfortable nook by the pool, and sat scowling at
the water so crossly, it was a wonder any trout came to his hook. but
the fat worms tempted several small ones, and he cheered up at the
prospect of food. tommy whistled while he picked, and in half an hour
came back with two quarts of nice berries and an armful of dry sticks
for the fire.

"we'll have a jolly dinner, after all," he said, as the flames went
crackling up, and the dry leaves made a pleasant smell.

"got four, but don't see how we'll ever cook 'em; no frying-pan,"
grumbled billy, throwing down the four little trout, which he had half
cleaned.

"don't want any. broil 'em on the coals, or toast 'em on a forked stick.
i'll show you how," said cheerful tommy, whittling away, and feeding his
fire as much like a real hunter as a small boy could be.

while he worked, billy ate berries and sighed for bread and butter. at
last, after much trouble, two of the trout were half cooked and eagerly
eaten by the hungry boys. but they were very different from the nice
brown ones mrs. mullin gave them; for in spite of tommy's struggles they
would fall in the ashes, and there was no salt to eat with them. by the
time the last were toasted, the young hunters were so hungry they could
have eaten anything, and not a berry was left.

"i set the trap down there, for i saw a hole among the vines, and i
shouldn't wonder if we got a rabbit or something," said tommy, when the
last bone was polished. "you go and catch some more fish, and i'll see
if i have caught any old chap as he went home to dinner."

off ran tommy; and the other boy went slowly back to the brook, wishing
with all his might he was at home eating sweet corn and berry pie.

the trout had evidently gone to their dinners, for not one bite did poor
billy get; and he was just falling asleep when a loud shout gave him
such a fright that he tumbled into the brook up to his knees.

"i've got him! come and see! he's a bouncer," roared tommy, from the
berry bushes some way off.

billy scrambled out, and went as fast as his wet boots would let him, to
see what the prize was. he found tommy dancing wildly round a fat gray
animal, who was fighting to get his paws out of the trap, and making a
queer noise as he struggled about.

"what is it?" asked billy, getting behind a tree as fast as possible;
for the thing looked fierce, and he was very timid.

"a raccoon, i guess, or a big woodchuck. won't his fur make a fine cap?
i guess the other fellows will wish they'd come with us," said tommy,
prancing to and fro, without the least idea what to do with the
creature.

"he'll bite. we'd better run away and wait till he's dead," said billy.

"wish he'd got his head in, then i could carry him off; but he does look
savage, so we'll have to leave him awhile, and get him when we come
back. but he's a real beauty." and tommy looked proudly at the bunch of
gray fur scuffling in the sand.

"can we ever eat him?" asked hungry billy, ready for a fried crocodile
if he could get it.

"if he's a raccoon, we can; but i don't know about woodchucks. the
fellows in my books don't seem to have caught any. he's nice and fat; we
might try him when he's dead," said tommy, who cared more for the skin
to show than the best meal ever cooked.

the sound of a gun echoing through the wood gave tommy a good idea,--

"let's find the man and get him to shoot this chap; then we needn't
wait, but skin him right away, and eat him too."

off they went to the camp; and catching up their things, the two hunters
hurried away in the direction of the sound, feeling glad to know that
some one was near them, for two or three hours of wood life made them a
little homesick.

they ran and scrambled, and listened and called; but not until they had
gone a long way up the mountain did they find the man, resting in an old
hut left by the lumbermen. the remains of his dinner were spread on the
floor, and he lay smoking, and reading a newspaper, while his dog dozed
at his feet, close to a well-filled game-bag.

he looked surprised when two dirty, wet little boys suddenly appeared
before him,--one grinning cheerfully, the other looking very dismal and
scared as the dog growled and glared at them as if they were two
rabbits.

"hollo!" said the man.

"hollo!" answered tommy.

"who are you?" asked the man.

"hunters," said tommy.

"had good luck?" and the man laughed.

"first-rate. got a raccoon in our trap, and we want you to come and
shoot him," answered tommy, proudly.

"sure?" said the man, looking interested as well as amused.

"no; but i think so."

"what's he like?"

tommy described him, and was much disappointed when the man lay down
again, saying, with another laugh,--

"it's a woodchuck; he's no good."

"but i want the skin."

"then don't shoot him, let him die; that's better for the skin," said
the man, who was tired and didn't want to stop for such poor game.

all this time billy had been staring hard at the sandwiches and bread
and cheese on the floor, and sniffing at them, as the dog sniffed at
him.

"want some grub?" asked the man, seeing the hungry look.

"i just do! we left our lunch, and i've only had two little trout and
some old berries since breakfast," answered billy, with tears in his
eyes and a hand on his stomach.

"eat away then; i'm done, and don't want the stuff." and the man took up
his paper as if glad to be let alone.

it was lucky that the dog had been fed, for in ten minutes nothing was
left but the napkin; and the boys sat picking up the crumbs, much
refreshed, but ready for more.

"better be going home, my lads; it's pretty cold on the mountain after
sunset, and you are a long way from town," said the man, who had peeped
at them over his paper now and then, and saw, in spite of the dirt and
rips, that they were not farmer boys.

"we don't live in town; we are at mullin's, in the valley. no hurry; we
know the way, and we want to have some sport first. you seem to have
done well," answered tommy, looking enviously from the gun to the
game-bag, out of which hung a rabbit's head and a squirrel's tail.

"pretty fair; but i want a shot at the bear. people tell me there is one
up here, and i'm after him; for he kills the sheep, and might hurt some
of the young folks round here," said the man, loading his gun with a
very sober air; for he wanted to get rid of the boys and send them home.

billy looked alarmed; but tommy's brown face beamed with joy as he said
eagerly,--

"i hope you'll get him. i'd rather shoot a bear than any other animal
but a lion. we don't have those here, and bears are scarce. mullin said
he hadn't heard of one for a long time; so this must be a young one, for
they killed the big one two years ago."

that was true, and the man knew it. he did not really expect or want to
meet a bear, but thought the idea of one would send the little fellows
home at once. finding one of them was unscared, he laughed, and said
with a nod to tommy,--

"if i had time i'd take _you_ along, and show you how to hunt; but this
fat friend of yours couldn't rough it with us, and we can't leave him
alone; so go ahead your own way. only i wouldn't climb any higher, for
among the rocks you are sure to get hurt or lost."

"oh, i say, let's go! such fun, billy! i know you'll like it. a real gun
and dog and hunter! come on, and don't be a molly-coddle," cried tommy,
wild to go.

"i won't! i'm tired, and i'm going home; you can go after your old bears
if you want to. i don't think much of hunting anyway, and wish i hadn't
come," growled billy, very cross at being left out, yet with no desire
to scramble any more.

"can't stop. good-by. get along home, and some day i'll come and take
you out with me, little leatherstocking," said the man, striding off
with the dear gun and dog and bag, leaving billy to wonder what he meant
by that queer name, and tommy to console himself with the promise made
him.

"let's go and see how old chucky gets on," he said good-naturedly, when
the man vanished.

"not till i'm rested. i can get a good nap on this pile of hay; then
we'll go home before it's late," answered lazy billy, settling himself
on the rough bed the lumbermen had used.

"i just wish i had a boy with some go in him; you ain't much better than
a girl," sighed tommy, walking off to a pine-tree where some squirrels
seemed to be having a party, they chattered and raced up and down at
such a rate.

he tried his bow and shot all his arrows many times in vain, for the
lively creatures gave him no chance. he had better luck with a brown
bird who sat in a bush and was hit full in the breast with the sharpest
arrow. the poor thing fluttered and fell, and its blood wet the green
leaves as it lay dying on the grass. tommy was much pleased at first;
but as he stood watching its bright eye grow dim and its pretty brown
wings stop fluttering, he felt sorry that its happy little life was so
cruelly ended, and ashamed that his thoughtless fun had given so much
pain.

"i'll never shoot another bird except hawks after chickens, and i won't
brag about this one. it was so tame, and trusted me, i was very mean to
kill it."

as he thought this, tommy smoothed the ruffled feathers of the dead
thrush, and, making a little grave under the pine, buried it wrapped in
green leaves, and left it there where its mate could sing over it, and
no rude hands disturb its rest.

"i'll tell mamma and she will understand; but i _won't_ tell billy. he
is such a greedy old chap he'll say i ought to have kept the poor bird
to eat," thought tommy, as he went back to the hut, and sat there,
restringing his bow, till billy woke up, much more amiable for his
sleep.

they tried to find the woodchuck, but lost their way, and wandered
deeper into the great forest till they came to a rocky place and could
go no farther. they climbed up and tumbled down, turned back and went
round, looked at the sun and knew it was late, chewed sassafras bark
and checkerberry leaves for supper, and grew more and more worried and
tired as hour after hour went by and they saw no end to woods and rocks.
once or twice they heard the hunter's gun far away, and called and tried
to find him.

tommy scolded billy for not going with the man, who knew his way and was
probably safe in the valley when the last faint shot came up to them.
billy cried, and reproached tommy for proposing to run away; and both
felt very homesick for their mothers and their good safe beds at farmer
mullin's.

the sun set, and found them in a dreary place full of rocks and blasted
trees half-way up the mountain. they were so tired they could hardly
walk, and longed to lie down anywhere to sleep; but, remembering the
hunter's story of the bear, they were afraid to do it, till tommy
suggested climbing a tree, after making a fire at the foot of it to
scare away the bear, lest he climb too and get them.

but, alas! the matches were left in their first camp; so they decided to
take turns to sleep and watch, since it was plain that they must spend
the night there. billy went up first, and creeping into a good notch of
the bare tree tried to sleep, while brave tommy, armed with a big
stick, marched to and fro below. every few minutes a trembling voice
would call from above, "is anything coming?" and an anxious voice would
answer from below, "not yet. hurry up and go to sleep! i want my turn."

at last billy began to snore, and then tommy felt so lonely he couldn't
bear it; so he climbed to a lower branch, and sat nodding and trying to
keep watch, till he too fell fast asleep, and the early moon saw the
poor boys roosting there like two little owls.

a loud cry, a scrambling overhead, and then a great shaking and howling
waked tommy so suddenly that he lost his wits for a moment and did not
know where he was.

"the bear! the bear! don't let him get me! tommy, tommy, come and make
him let go," cried billy, filling the quiet night with dismal howls.

tommy looked up, expecting to behold a large bear eating his unhappy
friend; but the moonlight showed him nothing but poor billy dangling
from a bough, high above the ground, caught by his belt when he fell. he
had been dreaming of bears, and rolled off his perch; so there he hung,
kicking and wailing, half awake, and so scared it was long before tommy
could make him believe that he was quite safe.

how to get him down was the next question. the branch was not strong
enough to bear tommy, though he climbed up and tried to unhook poor
billy. the belt was firmly twisted at the back, and billy could not
reach to undo it, nor could he get his legs round the branch to pull
himself up. there seemed no way but to unbuckle the belt and drop. that
he was afraid to try; for the ground was hard, and the fall a high one.
fortunately both belt and buckle were strong; so he hung safely, though
very uncomfortably, while tommy racked his boyish brain to find a way to
help him.

billy had just declared that he should be cut in two very soon if
something was not done for him, and tommy was in despair, when they
thought they heard a far-off shout, and both answered it till their
throats were nearly split with screaming.

"i seem to see a light moving round down that way," cried billy from his
hook, pointing toward the valley.

"they are looking for us, but they won't hear us. i'll run and holler
louder, and bring 'em up here," answered tommy, glad to do anything
that would put an end to this dreadful state of things.

"don't leave me! i may fall and be killed! the bear might come! don't
go! don't go!" wailed billy, longing to drop, but afraid.

"i won't go far, and i'll come back as quick as i can. you are safe up
there. hold on, and we'll soon get you down," answered tommy, rushing
away helter-skelter, never minding where he went, and too much excited
to care for any damage.

the moon was bright on the blasted trees; but when he came down among
the green pines, it grew dark, and he often stumbled and fell. never
minding bumps and bruises, he scrambled over rocks, leaped fallen
trunks, floundered through brooks, and climbed down steep places, till,
with a reckless jump, he went heels over head into a deep hole, and lay
there for a moment stunned by the fall. it was an old bear-trap, long
unused, and fortunately well carpeted with dead leaves, or poor tommy
would have broken his bones.

when he came to himself he was so used up that he lay still for some
time in a sort of daze, too tired to know or care about anything, only
dimly conscious that somebody was lost in a tree or a well, and that,
on the whole, running away was not all fun.

by and by the sound of a gun roused him; and remembering poor billy, he
tried to get out of the pit,--for the moon showed him where he was. but
it was too deep, and he was too stiff with weariness and the fall to be
very nimble. so he shouted, and whistled, and raged about very like a
little bear caught in the pit.

it is very difficult to find a lost person on these great mountains, and
many wander for hours not far from help, bewildered by the thick woods,
the deep ravines, and precipices which shut them in. some have lost
their lives; and as tommy lay on the leaves used up by his various
struggles, he thought of all the stories he had lately heard at the
farm, and began to wonder how it would feel to starve to death down
there, and to wish poor billy could come to share his prison, that they
might die together, like the babes in the wood, or better still the boy
scouts lost on the prairies in that thrilling story, "bill boomerang,
the wild hunter of the west."

"i guess mother is worried this time, because i never stayed out all
night before, and i never will again without leave. it's rather good
fun, though, if they only find me. i ain't afraid, and it isn't very
cold. i always wanted to sleep out, and now i'm doing it. wish poor
billy was safely down and in this good bed with me. won't he be scared
all alone there? maybe the belt will break and he get hurt bumping down.
sorry now i left him, he's such a 'fraid-cat. there's the gun again!
guess it's that man after us. hi! hollo! here i am! whoop! hurrah! hi!
hi! hi!"

tommy's meditations ended in a series of yells as loud as his shrill
little voice could make them, and he thought some one answered. but it
must have been an echo, for no one came; and after another rampage round
his prison, the poor boy nestled down among the leaves, and went fast
asleep because there was nothing else to do.

so there they were, the two young hunters, lost at midnight on the
mountain,--one hanging like an apple on the old tree, and the other
sound asleep in a bear-pit. their distracted mothers meantime were
weeping and wringing their hands at the farm, while all the men in
the neighborhood were out looking for the lost boys. the hunter on his
return to the hotel had reported meeting the runaways and his effort to
send them home in good season; so people knew where to look, and, led
by the man and dog, up the mountain went mr. mullin with his troop. it
was a mild night, and the moon shone high and clear; so the hunt was,
on the whole, rather easy and pleasant at first, and lanterns flashed
through the dark forest like fireflies, the lonely cliffs seemed alive
with men, and voices echoed in places where usually only the brooks
babbled and the hawks screamed. but as time went on, and no sign of the
boys appeared, the men grew anxious, and began to fear some serious harm
had come to the runaways.

"i can't go home without them little shavers no way, 'specially tommy,"
said mr. mullin, as they stopped to rest after a hard climb through the
blasted grove. "he's a boy after my own heart, spry as a chipmunk, smart
as a young cockerel, and as full of mischief as a monkey. he ain't
afraid of anything, and i shouldn't be a mite surprised to find him
enjoyin' himself first-rate, and as cool as a coocumber."

"the fat boy won't take it so easily, i fancy. if it hadn't been for him
i'd have kept the lively fellow with me, and shown him how to hunt.
sorry now i didn't take them both home," said the man with the gun,
seeing his mistake too late, as people often do.

"maybe they've fell down a precipice and got killed, like moses warner,
when he was lost," suggested a tall fellow, who had shouted himself
hoarse.

"hush up, and come on! the dog is barkin' yonder, and he may have found
'em," said the farmer, hurrying toward the place where the hound was
baying at something in a tree.

it was poor billy, hanging there still, half unconscious with weariness
and fear. the belt had slipped up under his arms, so he could breathe
easily; and there he was, looking like a queer sort of cone on the
blasted pine.

"wal, i never!" exclaimed the farmer, as the tall lad climbed up, and,
unhooking billy, handed him down like a young bird, into the arms held
up to catch him.

"he's all right, only scared out of his wits. come along and look for
the other one. i'll warrant he went for help, and may be half-way home
by this time," said the hunter, who didn't take much interest in the fat
boy.

tommy's hat lay on the ground; and showing it to the dog, his master
told him to find the boy. the good hound sniffed about, and then set off
with his nose to the ground, following the zigzag track tommy had taken
in his hurry. the hunter and several of the men went after him, leaving
the farmer with the others to take care of billy.

presently the dog came to the bear-pit, and began to bark again.

"he's got him!" cried the men, much relieved; and rushing on soon saw
the good beast looking down at a little white object in one corner of
the dark hole.

it was tommy's face in the moonlight, for the rest of him was covered up
with leaves. the little round face seemed very quiet; and for a moment
the men stood quite still, fearing that the fall might have done the boy
some harm. then the hunter leaped down, and gently touched the brown
cheek. it was warm, and a soft snore from the pug nose made the man call
out, much relieved,--

"he's all right. wake up here, little chap; you are wanted at home. had
hunting enough for this time?"

as he spoke, tommy opened his eyes, gave a stretch, and said, "hollo,
billy," as calmly as if in his own bed at home. then the rustle of the
leaves, the moonlight in his face, and the sight of several men staring
down at him startled him wide awake.

"did you shoot the big bear?" he asked, looking up at the hunter with a
grin.

"no; but i caught a little one, and here he is," answered the man,
giving tommy a roll in the leaves, much pleased because he did not whine
or make a fuss.

"got lost, didn't we? oh, i say, where's billy? i left him up a tree
like a coon, and he wouldn't come down," laughed tommy, kicking off his
brown bed-clothes, and quite ready to get up now.

they all laughed with him; and presently, when the story was told, they
pulled the boy out of the pit, and went back to join the other wanderer,
who was now sitting up eating the bread and butter mrs. mullin sent for
their very late supper.

the men roared again, as the two boys told their various tribulations;
and when they had been refreshed, the party started for home, blowing
the tin horns, and firing shot after shot to let the scattered searchers
know that the lost children were found. billy was very quiet, and gladly
rode on the various broad backs offered for his use; but tommy stoutly
refused to be carried, and with an occasional "boost" over a very rough
place, walked all the way down on his own sturdy legs. he was the hero
of the adventure, and was never tired of relating how he caught the
woodchuck, cooked the fish, slid down the big rock, and went to bed in
the old bear-pit. but in his own little mind he resolved to wait till he
was older before he tried to be a hunter; and though he caught several
woodchucks that summer, he never shot another harmless little bird.

[illustration]

*       *       *       *       *

#the children's friend series#

[illustration]

handy illustrated volumes by popular authors, including: louisa m.
alcott, susan coolidge, nora perry, helen hunt jackson, louise chandler
moulton, juliana h. ewing, laura e. richards, a. g. plympton, etc.
choicely printed and attractively bound in cloth, with gold and ink
stamp on side. issued at the popular price of 50 cents per volume.

new issues.

may bartlett's stepmother.
by nora perry,
author of "another flock of girls,"
"hope benham," etc.

two dogs and a donkey.
by a. g. plympton,
author of "dear daughter dorothy," etc.

mary's meadow.
by juliana h. ewing,
author of "jackanapes," etc.

book of heroic ballads.
selected by mary w. tileston,
author of "daily strength for daily needs."

golden opportunity.
by jean ingelow,
author of "stories told to a child," etc.

land of lost toys.
by juliana h. ewing.

great emergency.
by juliana h. ewing.

two girls.
by susan coolidge,
author of "the katy did series," etc.

little tommy tucker.
by susan coolidge.

poppies and wheat.
by louisa m. alcott,
author of "little women," "little men," etc.

candy country.
by louisa m. alcott.

jessie's neighbor.
by louise chandler moulton,
author of "bed-time stories," etc.

previously issued.

against wind and tide.
by louise chandler moulton.

a hole in the wall.
by louisa m. alcott.

a little knight of labor.
by susan coolidge.

children's hour.
by mary w. tileston.

chop chin and the golden dragon.
by laura e. richards,
author of "captain january,"
"the joyous story of toto," etc.

cottage neighbors.
by nora perry.

curly locks.
by susan coolidge.

daddy darwin's dovecot.
by juliana h. ewing.

four of them.
by louise chandler moulton.

golden-breasted kootoo.
by laura e. richards.

goostie.
by mary caroline hyde.

hunter cats of connorloa.
by helen hunt jackson,
author of "ramona,"
"nelly's silver mine," etc.

jackanapes.
by juliana h. ewing.

little olive the heiress.
by a. g. plympton.

man without a country.
by edward everett hale,
author of "ten times one is ten," etc.

marjorie's three gifts.
by louisa m. alcott.

may flowers.
by louisa m. alcott.

miss toosey's mission.
by the author of "belle," "laddie," etc.

nonsense songs.
by edward lear.

rags and velvet gowns.
by a. g. plympton.

story of a short life.
by juliana h. ewing.

sundown songs.
by laura e. richards.

that little smith girl.
by nora perry.

under the stable floor.
a christmas story.
by mary caroline hyde.

christmas at tappan sea.
by mary caroline hyde.

the children's friend series, put up in sets:

[illustration]

the louisa m. alcott library for little people.
5 vols. $2.50.

the susan coolidge library for little people.
4 vols. $2.00.

the juliana h. ewing library for little people.
6 vols. $3.00.

the louise chandler moulton library for little people.
3 vols. $1.50.

the nora perry library for little people.
3 vols. $1.50.

the laura e. richards library for little people.
3 vols.  $1.50.

the a. g. plympton library for little people.
3 vols.  $1.50.

mary caroline hyde's christmas library.
3 vols.  $1.50.

little, brown, and company, publishers
254 washington street, boston, mass.

transcriber's notes

obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. variations
in hyphenation have been standardised but all other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged.

the fulfilment

_by the same author_

jewel sowers. 6s.

=the week's survey.=—"an original and intensely interesting
novel. we should welcome anything further from the pen of this
anonymous writer, who has produced a book that anyone might be proud to
sign."

=the onlooker.=—"the author hides her—is it her?—identity
under anonymity, but has no reason to fear criticism. though called
‘a novel', it is a clever parable, and deals with the evil of selfishness
and the blessings resulting from work for work's sake."

=manchester guardian.=—"‘the jewel sowers' is wholly fantastic
in its incidents, but its characters are those of our society, and
with all the machinery of a fairy tale the book still belongs to the
realms of daily fiction. appropriately enough the scene is laid in
another world, one in which everything is said to be the opposite of
the life of this planet. but this is a mere warning that the tale is
fantastic; men and women in lucifram, as the new world is called, are
even too much like those on this, and if their powers are strangely
superior, their motives are entirely familiar. the book, in fact, is
an experiment in fantasy, and none the less pleasant on that account.
it is neither an allegory, as are other tales similarly constructed,
nor yet a satire, though there are elements of both interwoven with the
adventures and the incidents. the anonymous authoress has demanded a
wider sphere for the evolution of her characters, and no one who feels
the charms of her pleasantly-depicted heroine will grudge the novel
atmosphere in which she is forced to suffer and to act. the book is
lightly written, bright and entertaining, and almost every character
introduced is neatly characterised. perhaps the best of them is the
fairy frog, whose cheerful temper is the result of martyrdom, and who
should earn a place among the favourite heroes of the fairy world."

marigold. 6s.

=the court journal.=—"the author has so tender and graceful a
touch, so keen an insight into human nature and human impulses, and so
marked a power of vivid description, that he must almost certainly one
day write a book of great beauty and power."

=manchester courier.=—"the author of ‘jewel sowers' has written
another allegorical romance entitled ‘marigold,' depicting the loves,
hatreds and jealousies of spirit beings in a fantastic world. the book
is curious and unconventional, and is altogether as much removed from
the average ‘potboiler,' both in aim and treatment, as anything could
well be. the author gives evidence of considerable talent, and further
contributions from his or her pen are to be awaited with interest."

=scotsman.=—"light, agreeable, and animated always by a lively
play of graceful feeling, the story should not fail to entertain anyone
who takes it up."

the
fulfilment

by
edith allonby

author of
"jewel sowers" and "marigold"

london
greening & co. ltd.
1905

[_all rights reserved_]

_first published, dec. 1st, 1905_

contents

part i
page

earth                   1

part ii
hell                   135

part iii
heaven                 267

introduction

the book for which its author gave her life is now given to the world
with profound pity and regret. pity for a bright young life so suddenly
hurried into eternity, and regret that the circumstances of her tragic
death have made it necessary that her work should be published in an
incomplete and unrevised state. had miss edith allonby lived there
is no doubt that the story would have been considerably altered and
improved before being put into print. much that is now vague in meaning
would have been explained, much that is now retained would have been
deleted. the explicit terms of her last letters make the task of
bringing out _the fulfilment_ a hard and anxious one for her
executors, her relatives and her publishers. she wished the book to be
published word for word as she wrote it, as can be seen from her last
letter to her publisher, quoted below. her last letter to her relatives
was much to the same effect. it will show the responsibility which had
to be faced.

"i have received your letter and the enclosed criticism. thank you
for both. i have read the criticism through but it has not altered
me in my decision. he has said what i know will be the general
opinion of the world. most of the views i had expressed in the
beginning part of _marigold_, and you will remember how those
were received—as ‘uncouth attempts at satire,' ‘silly remarks,' ‘a
farrago of nonsense,' ‘a silly and pretentious book.'

"i have told you i do not mind criticism, neither do i. but it hurts
me to the very soul that people should so misunderstand that which
is true. god knows with what purity of intention i wrote the first
chapters of _marigold_—never meaning to give offence, but how in
this world can it be avoided?

"i have read the criticism, and i could answer it word for word, or
any criticism that might follow it from any source, but that is not
allowed, and not to be. when i first wrote _the fulfilment_ i
longed to see it published, that i might fight the battle for it
with my pen. it would have been like coming down into the arena to
fight and breathe and conquer. but as the time went by, after it was
returned to me, i began to realise slowly what a terrible book i had
written, as well as beautiful and true, and it seemed as if it called
for all i had to give as an expiation before it could go free. i put
it away—the book and the thought. but i began to write ever on the
same theme—the revelation heaven had given me. you know how it has
prospered. and then on whitsunday the voice awoke me that i must bring
my greatest treasure forward once again, for though i have let it
lie patiently these four years, hoping to make an opening for it, it
has ever been in my heart and brain. and again i felt the pleasing
prospects of the battle. i knew what strength i had, and always have
had, did i care to use it, to answer those who disagreed with what i
wrote. and in the cause of such a book i felt that everything would be
allowable. but there has come the season out of silence to be silent.
we cannot bandy words about religious things. i cannot anyway. i feel
it all so much i cannot talk about it. for all i write about i love
and fear. god knows i have not been familiar, i have only loved simply
both god and man.

"but there is only one way of showing it, and that by dying simply.
when i am once out of the way the big stumbling-block has been
removed. people can no longer think i have written with a fanciful
irreverence when i have had before me, all the time, nothing but
death; for i believe, looking back, it was there with the very first
page.

"and so (for when this reaches you i shall be dead—only to this
world) i leave it as my dying request that you publish, exactly as i
have sent it to you, _the fulfilment_. you must ask the gentleman
to return it, and tell him my decision. and at the same time i do not
wish you or him or anyone to think that his criticism has had anything
to do with my death. for i do not wish you or anyone to view me as a
common suicide—overcome by this or that, or bowed down by the thought
of failure or disappointment. i have simply died to make room for a
great truth. and i have died trusting humbly in god.

"and so you cannot deny me that which i decide. to you it must become
an impersonal affair. you must publish it because it is a dying
command, and publish it word for word as i have left it. and now no
one can take offence—neither the company whose impress the book
bears, nor anyone connected with it.

"and of the religionists i only ask that they will have the same
toleration for me that i have ever had for them. i mean those who are
sincere and simple among them, of any denomination. for i am sincere
and simple too.

"and now i must say ‘good-bye.' i feel very sad about it, for i have
written so many letters to you, and told you so many things that it is
parting with a friend. and you will say a good word for me if you get
the chance. and if they say i'm mad, tell them from me it's a madness
that will spread—not the _suicide_ but the _belief_. but
indeed it is no madness.

"and for your friend, tell him this from me—i wasn't writing of
‘paradise _lost_' but of ‘heaven _gained_,' and that if i
remember my milton correctly, they didn't _aspire_ to tea-tables
in the garden, but simply ate it picnic fashion, so that heaven with
its tables goes one better still. and tell him that if he will only
read the book through once again, i think he'll find there is a
simple, homely charm even in jesus christ, for it's like everything
else. you've got to get used to it. and when i go to heaven i'd rather
meet simple people who had power than great big kings who talked of
it and sometimes found it wasn't there. and give him my love and
tell him there was no one more disgusted with those sties than i was
at the time. and that the young man was so terribly _real_ he
nearly broke my heart, and the college—well, perhaps that _was_
a nightmare, but they're realer than anything else. and tell him it
was all _me_. and ask him not to be too particular over grammar,
or meanings or muddles. they were invented to make men human—that
is, unsuperior. i never heard of such a thing as goethe explaining
his meaning all before. that's _quite_ an old fashion. you give
people nothing to think about, and cast quite a slur upon their
reputation for brains.

"and you see in my capacity as teacher i would _force_ people to
think if i could, whether they would or no.

"i am afraid i am very loath to stop, it will be such a long
silence—but silence speaks, you know, and i shall speak, or rather
my heavenly father. and now i say, not from politeness, but from
the bottom of my heart, i hope some day we shall meet again—not in
stuffy london, or anywhere upon this earth, but, why not? at one of
the tea-tables of heaven. and i wish it very much indeed—and it all
depends on you—whether you will follow in the simple way that god
directs.

"with kind regards, and the love that all heaven's children may bear
with one another."

both miss allonby's previous books, _jewel sowers_ and _marigold_, were
subjected to revision before they appeared, and her publisher fully
expected that she would consent to the same necessary revisions in the
case of _the fulfilment_. there was no question as to the book being
published. it was mutually understood that _the fulfilment_ should be
issued on her birthday, december 1st. she desired that the passages to
be deleted should be indicated. her wish was complied with, and her
publishers were daily awaiting a letter giving consent to the revision,
which was to be made and submitted for approval, when the news of her
death came as a terrible shock. it is here unnecessary to refer to the
sympathetic attention the tragedy attracted from the press and the
public.

the question then arose as to the possibility of publishing the book
for which miss allonby died so unnecessarily. her relatives and her
publishers were in constant and personal communication. could her last
wish be fulfilled? curiously enough she expressed the desire in her
will that none of her relatives should see or read the book until it
was printed and published. her publishers' responsibility was therefore
a serious one. the feelings and the wishes of the living and miss
allonby's reputation had to be considered. certain pages of her book
contained references to holy things and persons turned in such a way
that they seemed flippant, irreverent, even ridiculous, and they were
undoubtedly not literature in any sense. no possible good could come
of giving such pages to the world. they appear to convey no message,
though no doubt the author could have supplied a key. they seem to be
meaningless flippancy. now no one had more sincere respect for miss
allonby than her publishers. they were on the most friendly terms.
therefore, while they would have liked to carry out her last wish to
the letter, they felt that in justice to her memory the book could not
appear in the exact condition in which she left it. in this predicament
a request was put to a well-known and prominent london minister, of
broad views and large sympathies—on whose judgment the publishers felt
the utmost reliance could be placed—that he should see the troublesome
passages and give his opinion as to the advisability of publishing
them. he courteously consented and very kindly gave considerable time
and thought to the matter. his earnest opinion was that the book should
not be published at all, or, if published, that all the emendations
suggested by the publishers should be carried out. for good reasons
the minister who thus criticised the book desires that his name shall
not be made known, but the public can rest assured that he is a
gentleman in whom all denominations would have confidence, and whose
judgment all would respect. this opinion was conveyed to miss allonby's
relatives and executors, who, after careful consideration, decided to
publish _the fulfilment_ with the emendations the publishers considered
necessary. to quote from a letter from the executors: "we think we
should do our utmost to carry out edith's wishes, but they should be
the _real_ wishes. her _real_ wish was that the message contained in
her book should reach as many as possible. to publish it in its present
form, though it would comply with the _letter_ of her request, would be
to defeat its object.... the guiding principle should be to publish it
in such a form as would be most likely to realise her wish of giving
the message to the largest number possible." under these conditions
the publishers carefully and sympathetically prepared _the fulfilment_
for press, and it is now published with some of the emendations
originally suggested. only such pages or passages as the publishers
considered miss allonby herself would, at a more normal time, have
deleted have been taken out. the book has not been subjected to any
revision, except of the most obviously necessary kind—literals, etc.
there are no alterations. all the editor has done has been to carefully
eliminate those passages most likely to give pain and offence both to
the relatives and the religious public. wherever an omission occurs
it is indicated by a hiatus, and also a statement to that effect. all
those who knew, loved and respected miss edith allonby will understand
the publishers' attitude regarding the emendations. they have been firm
in not yielding to the morbid wish of numerous correspondents who have
pleaded for the book being issued as the author left it. they have
preferred to respect the feelings of the living and honour the memory
of the dead.

it will be of interest to quote a few extracts from miss allonby's
correspondence relating to _the fulfilment_, as showing her
own attitude towards her work. she first approached her publishers
respecting _the fulfilment_ on june 17th 1905, when in the course
of a long letter she said:—

"_june 17th._

"will you please give me all your attention, without thinking
of anything else whilst you read. i have been _thinking_,
five minutes in church last sunday morning, and since then i have
deliberated. you see i have been brought up to teach—in an age when
great things are expected of teachers—patience, lucidity, sympathy,
and i don't know what. one's classes are never blamed for stupidity,
carelessness or inattention—only the teacher. that has its dangers
for the pupils, certainly, but it does not excuse the teacher from
doing the utmost best.... now i have a book which is as easy to read
as a b c (for those who will attend). it has no allegories in it, no
myths—nothing but truth. and i am very proud of it, for it was given
me by god right away down at the bottom of the valley of despair and
humiliation. i have been wandering about down there, it is true, ever
since, but that proves all the more that it is direct from god, for
otherwise it isn't the air in which an ordinary person could live at
all. i am not to blame either for keeping it all this time (i wrote
it in the spring and summer of 1901), for i _did_ send it to
some publisher or other one friday night and it was back by tuesday
morning—and it was too good for that. too good to be tossed about
from one place to the other like any tramp or fawning beggar asking to
be taken in.... i am very serious, i am sending to you something that
i was going to say is more precious to me than life—i only pray god
grant that it may be."

the manuscript was duly read and reported on, and, subject to some
necessary alterations and omissions being made, it was accepted
for publication and a promise given that it should be published on
the first of december. the suggested revision was the subject of
considerable correspondence. the following few lines are taken from a
letter dated august 13th 1905:—

"_august 13th._

"the first part of the book is true—man can witness that—and for the
remainder god is witness. i have not written it for money, i have not
written it to please, but only to instruct and lighten those few who
care to understand, and they may be few now, but some day they will be
many.... of course i am a bit frightened of the world, but, believe
me, i am a great deal more frightened of god. _real_ fear. that
is what makes me write common sense about heaven instead of twaddle,
and as for people being so sensitive about jesus christ—they don't
feel all that much, or the world would be a vastly different place....
when i wrote _marigold_ you wanted to send a copy to all the
religious papers, but i should like _that_ for _this_
instead, for it is the essence of real, true religion."

miss allonby's own opinions as to the seeming irreverence of certain
portions of her work were both firm and strong. she knew her own
interpretation of such passages. she alone, in her own mind, held the
key which would make plain all hidden meanings. she, firm in her own
purity and reverence for her maker, seemed quite unable to realise that
others, nine hundred and ninety-nine out of a thousand, would without
hesitation condemn much that she had written as rank blasphemy, even as
silly, flippant irreverence. writing on august 20th, she said:—

"_august 20th._

"speaking for myself, i do not care one iota about the opinion of the
press, _religious or otherwise_. all i care about is telling
what i have to tell as plainly and as simply as is possible. i am
perfectly well able to stand the risk of being thought irreverent, for
only those who have never understood the meaning of true reverence can
accuse me of it. you see i _believe_ what i have written. i more
than believe it. i have felt, and so i know. and that makes all the
difference.... well, it all came to me one long night in the middle
of blinding darkness which seemed to send the world topsy-turvy and
then set it right again.... if i offend, i offend, but i will offend
men rather than god, for it is all quite true in to-day's lesson—‘the
foolishness of god is wiser than men, and the weakness of god is
stronger than men.'... never mind readers, or traditions, or any of
those kind of things, for it is time we stepped right out of them. it
is silly going the roundabout dangerous way to heaven when god shows
a nearer and comparatively easy way.... i don't think i have anything
else to say. i am glad you liked _deborah_ from quite personal
reasons—and i hope you don't want to cross out the bit about the
sties, because i daresay there are many other little women treading
over the dark path who have some such minor disfigurements, or even
greater ones. and as for what became of her. my dear sir! can't you
_see_—according to the book she went to heaven—isn't that the
ending? and a very nice ending too. indeed, what could be nicer, for an
earthly altar isn't in it. it has so much heathen self-sacrifice about
it."

it will be seen from the above extract that the deleting of certain
passages was an understood thing, for she hopes that the publisher will
not need "to cross out the bit about the sties."

it would seem impossible to imagine a more bright, gentle and lovable
nature than miss allonby's, nor one less likely to give way to a
suicidal impulse. she was always of a happy disposition. all who knew
her loved her for her pleasant manner, her refinement, her good temper
and kindly sympathy. however, it may be recorded that she never enjoyed
very good health, being always frail and delicate.

miss allonby was born at bankside farm, cark-in-cartmel, north
lancashire, on december 1st 1875. her mother died when she was only
four years of age, and when she was thirteen she lost her father. she
felt his death very keenly, and it made a lasting impression upon her.
when she was seven the family moved to liverpool, and she was educated
at st saviour's, everton, at grove street college for girls, and
finally at whitelands college, chelsea. on leaving college she became
mistress of the school at bishopsbourne, kent, where she remained for
three years. then she took charge of the school at bishop's fonthill,
salisbury, and afterwards went to lancaster as head of st anne's
school, and was there till her untimely and tragic death, a period of
four years and a half. when she took charge of the lancaster school
it had a none too enviable reputation either as regards behaviour nor
education. by sheer strength of will, by the power of loving-kindness,
she made a wonderful change in two years. the children worshipped her,
became well-behaved, obedient and attentive to their lessons. the
school again earned its grants and gained good reports. one of the
inspectors in a report said that her influence had brought the school
"from darkness into light."

prefatory

the following words were prefixed to the ms. by the authoress:—

dedicated
to
god

with all the reverence and fear
of which the human heart is capable.

*       *       *       *       *

as to the interpretation of the allegorical persons and incidents
which figure mainly in the second and third parts of the book,
we may remember mr augustine birrell's excellent phrases on
browning:—"lucidity is not simplicity. a lucid poem is not necessarily
an easy one. a great poet may tax our brain, but he ought not to puzzle
our wits. we may often have to ask in humility, what _does_ he
mean? but not in despair, what _can_ he mean?" this holds good of
writers in prose as well as in verse: and miss allonby's full meaning
is scarce likely to be revealed on a first perusal.

part i.

earth

the fulfilment

chapter i

cold, cold, unutterably cold and silent. the woods were still, the
frosty air so still that not a leaf stirred. the moon shone white and
glorious; scarcely one shimmering cloud marred its strength; and the
stars tingled and gleamed and danced. white hung a silver robe of
sparsest snow over all the land, like a net of interwoven diamonds.
away up north ran the cumbrian mountains, standing like giants against
the blue-black sky. there rose helvellyn with its mighty hump, like a
headless criminal burdened high with woe: there the "old man"—he who
looks o'er coniston—his beard and head quite white and blazoned by the
moon. then stretching away from these, down to the coast and southward,
the barren peat moss—nothing but marsh and bush and scanty tree—and
bordering this on the land-side a range of hills, alternate wood or
grass, terminating in ellerside and how-barrow.

there is a glorious view from these two hilly peaks: the one a barren
rock-strewn height, bare and uncompromising, the other, in its very
name, breathing its loveliness. "ellerside breast"—sweetest and purest
name—most beautiful of visions.

the rugged mountains, the lonely mosses, grand in their desolation,
the wide expanse of woodland, the gentle fields, the green park with
its herd of deer and well-planned trees, the glorious sea and bay,
untarnished yet by aught but lonely cottages and farms along its
shores, the large hall with its towers and stately cupolas, all make
the country round a dream of loveliness. but on this december night,
in its calm and purity, it has grown to grandeur. the heavy woods with
their black shadows look weird, their stillness frightens. no twitter
of bird or hum of insect, till suddenly the shrill tu-hoot of an owl
breaks forth and is repeated.

and suddenly, as if by the magic of it, you and i are transported to
that wooded breast. we see a narrow path leading through the trees up
to a simple wooden seat, a narrower, more rugged one leading down from
it, a short, rocky space in front, and then a sheer declivity down
through the steep wood to the borders of the park. the quiet little
hamlet, never noisy, is now still with the silence of sleep. nothing
but the owl cries out the reign of night.

and now having come with me thus far—stay—and cavil not, if
for a little time instead of flesh and blood i give you spirits;
spirits who in their intensity, their grandeur, and even in their
_littleness_, do far outvie our flesh-imprisoned selves.

there are two, and at first glance there is a similarity about them so
striking that you are compelled to look again.

one was a little above medium height. every limb was sinewy, with a
lithe suppleness and gracefulness which glossed over the real strength
beneath. he stood out dark in bold relief against the moonshine—like
serpentine coiling smoke of clearest blackness. a face magnificent in
profile—though framed on delicate lines—and eyes deep, hard, dark,
far-seeing, far-reaching, unfathomable and cold. the other, at first
sight, bore a marked resemblance. but there were strong differences,
which showed themselves more strongly at every after-glance. he was
of about the same height, with the same perfect cast of features, and
there the likeness ended. white and pure and cold, he too was vividly
distinct, with a simple strength and purpose, and the grace, if grace
it can be called, born of these. in his eyes there shone simplicity
and pureness, and something stern too. he was standing on the extreme
rocky point of the peaked woodland, scanning the horizon, land, and
sea, and sky, and ever and anon his eyes travelled to one of the
millions of bright stars shining overhead. to this star the eyes of his
companion also wandered in contemplation. he sat upon the rustic seat,
bending his arm gracefully over the back and leaning there, his head
upon his hand. his left hand hung motionless by his side, and on its
middle finger shone a ring. a glorious belt of blood-red stones with
a brilliant one of remarkable beauty in the centre. it was the only
relief from darkness round about him, and though but a small thing, it
gleamed with magical effect.

another "tu-hoot." a slight wind rustled and parted the leaves, and
there between the two in the open space another figure stood, a spirit
of animation, beauty, strength and vigour. slightly taller than the
other two, he moved with easy step and sat down by the opposite arm
of the seat. then he looked up and revealed a face on which sat some
discontent and perhaps annoyance.

"thank god to get away for a time," said he.

"contact with mortals makes you unmindful of manners." the dark spirit
had spoken, gazing at him, laughingly.

"yes, plucritus. one cannot stay in an old farm-house for several hours
in the society of an over-fed midwife and not get slightly tarnished."

"but what are you doing there?" said he who answered to the name of
plucritus. "over-fed midwives? what shocking bad taste."

"well, so it may be. but there i've been and there i'll have to stay."

"but why?"

"destiny, i suppose—or perhaps ill-luck."

"a girl or a boy?"

"a girl—worse luck still." and he said it with such contempt that the
other's laugh was perhaps excusable.

"you're in for it and no mistake. if i am any judge you won't get on
very well." and the spirit virginius alone saw the steady, penetrating,
sidelong glance that accompanied plucritus's idle words.

"no," rejoined genius.

"it's ridiculous. you have made a mistake."

"i never make mistakes," replied the other, drily.

the blood-red ring gleamed scarlet.

"never? did you say never?"

"yes. what a beastly night. that moon looks as sickly as the baby."

"it is a glorious night." virginius spoke for the first time.

"you there, virginius? i had not seen you."

"yes, genius, i am here," he answered slowly, but his face was turned
toward the mountains.

"virginius is always there," continued the dark spirit. "but tell us
how you come to be here. i saw the star, but scarcely reckoned it was
yours."

"well, the story is long and uninteresting. but to be brief and enclose
much in a nutshell, i have come to remove a curse."

"pooh! an impossibility. bah! an idle dream."

"that is exactly my own opinion. i am no good at removing curses.
besides, the family is particularly unlucky."

"indeed!"

"yes. it has a descent, i am told, from the coming of the first
pretender, and is part scotch, part irish, and part english."

"and in what does its ill-luck consist?" plucritus had changed his
position. he was leaning forward, apparently examining and playing with
his ring.

"a few uninteresting sins, i believe. debts contracted by ancestors
descended upon children. you know it, the catechism explains it."

"heigh! virginius! what is it?" and plucritus threw back his head,
laughing indolently. but as he received no answer he quoted it
himself:—

"‘for i the lord thy god am a jealous god, and visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands in them that love me and
keep my commandments.'"

"what profanity!" said genius, idly. "do you know, plucritus, i have
been often struck by your astounding knowledge of scripture?"

and plucritus, looking up, met the eyes of virginius. it was but the
glance of an instant, but even the moonshine paled beneath the gleam of
steel against steel, flash for flash, quivering in the frosty light.

"i have to keep myself in touch with mankind," he answered lightly.
"and that latter half of the second commandment has always appealed to
me. but continue your story. i am interested. tell me of this ill-luck."

"there is really nothing to tell. the usual debts, you know, contracted
by those who willingly lend themselves to the devil. gambling,
drinking, adultery, self-indulgence, self-centring. all these things,
when practised by successive generations, bring their accompaniments of
mental or physical weakness, sometimes both."

"and in all cases moral decay," remarked plucritus, thoughtfully.

"in all cases," said genius.

"and so what you call ill-luck is simply just punishment," plucritus
continued.

"maybe," said genius, carelessly, "maybe  not. i do not concern myself
much about it. i am neither philosopher nor philanthropist, and i can
assure you i take this task upon me grudgingly. i have no wish to
become guardian angel to little girls."

"you need not fear that. virginius belongs to the jealous god, and will
look after his position jealously. besides, after a time, you will
learn to like her." and again he gave the sidelong, piercing glance.

"not i. before i arrived some malign fairy godmother had stepped in and
bestowed a bundle of infirmities; i suppose from other years." here
plucritus laughed right out, and his laugh was very clear and low.

"alas! poor genius! you have been forestalled. a man afflicted that
way is bitter enough and bad enough—but a woman!"

"yes. it has put me out considerably. for of all things i love the
beauty of proportion. and i am not able to find out who has done it."

"virginius," said plucritus, gaily, "it is to be the scourge and rod
wherewith he chasteneth. now, had i arrived there first i should have
gifted her with rarest beauty—as a snare, you know."

"well, i am going now," plucritus went on. "the removal of a paltry
curse is but a paltry affair, scarcely worthy of my notice. but for all
that, before i go i will lay you a wager, genius, that you will not be
able to perform your task."

"and what is the bet?"

"why, it will grow with time. at present it is nondescript and vague.
say that ring upon your finger. but to show you that i bear no ill-will
let us shake hands for old comradeship."

and so these two clasped hands and parted, and virginius and genius
were left alone.

then genius removed from the middle finger of his left hand a ring, and
held it in the moonlight.

it was a perfect round of opals, designed on exactly the same plan as
that worn by plucritus, with a wonderful stone in the centre.

"look at this ring," he said thoughtfully. "every tint of the rainbow
is blended in it, and sparkles at every turn, and yet running round
from stone to stone, and centring in the largest like one pure drop,
there is to-night a streak of blood, a streak of red, i should say, and
that means pain. now i know the meaning of that. it means failure and
disappointment—two things that i detest more than any other."

virginius then likewise removed from the middle finger of his left hand
a ring of similar construction, but of diamonds, pure and flashing
bright.

"look at this ring," he said. "every flash of dazzling light is
imprisoned in it. to-night it has shone with marvellous brilliancy.
look at this centre stone; it is glorious. this means success."

"to you, perhaps. but your reckoning of success is somewhat strange";
and genius looked at the dazzling purity with interest, for it was
marvellously bright. presently he added: "and yet had we compared rings
with plucritus i doubt not that he would have been able to express an
opinion too. i noticed the scarlet bloodstones were expressly bright
to-night."

"even so," replied the other spirit.

chapter ii

the shabby old farmyard, small and dingy as it might appear to one
more accustomed to the outside world, was a huge and magnificent place
to the untravelled. the gates, the doors, the barns, the stables, the
cow-sheds, the very puddles and the cart-ruts were tremendous. the
swing in the granary took you higher and gave you a more delicious
feeling than any other swing could. in fact, you doubted if there could
be found another swing in the whole wide world worthy to be called a
swing beside it. then when you went to play at "houses," couldn't you
just wander off on to the rocky lots and pick and choose just what you
liked? that very big rock was the drawing-room, and all the little
rocks the chairs and tables. and over there by the flat rock you had
your dining-room, and a little further off was the kitchen.

but you didn't reckon much of the kitchen. you saw that every day.
but drawing-rooms and dining-rooms! you didn't often get into these
in real life, for in your house there was only a parlour with a
glorious thunder-and-lightning carpet. for all that, the parlour had
its attractions too. the family never sat in there unless there was
"company." then, of course, state had to be kept up. on ordinary
days you played about the kitchen and listened to the ghost stories
of the servant girl. and my! no duchess in the land could have been
more interesting to you than that girl. she belonged to the salvation
army, and could sing hymns that really _were_ interesting, not
like those you sang at church, which were so roundabout you couldn't
understand them. this is what she used to sing, and the tune was so
catchy and easy you could never forget it:—

"the devil and me
we can't agree,
i hate him
and he-e hates me.
he caught me once
but he let me go-o
from the land o-of si-in and woe."

then when she got tired of that she would break forth thus:—

"we'll all go to glory when we die
(when we die).
oh, we'll all go to glory when we die
(when we die).
we'll all go to glory—we'll all go to glory
we'll all go to glory when we die."

there was something rousing about that last. when one has been told a
thing about six times with much vehemence, one begins to believe it.

but her resources did not end with the religious. bless you, no! when
she was peeling the potatoes she gained inspirations for ghost stories.

"it was as black as pitch," she would say, in a low voice. "and as he
was passing by the oak tree he saw something ghastly swinging from
the branches. it was the body of a woman who had been murdered twenty
years ago. and he saw her throat was cut. and all the way home he heard
footsteps following him. and when he got there he fell down dead."

it was gruesome, as of course it was meant to be. but the teller had
her reward. some three or four pairs of blue eyes were all fixed on
her, mouths open, breath coming in short gasps. and then, of course,
she had the satisfaction of knowing that the children dared not go to
bed at night, and the still greater satisfaction of knowing that they
were too ashamed to own up to their fear.

the most wonderful part about her was that she would stop quite calmly
in the most awful part to remove an eye from the potato she was
peeling, and then she would actually say, "where did i get to? oh,
yes." there was something uncanny about that girl, she had so much
_sang-froid_, and was never frightened at the workings of her own
brain, as so many of us are.

but if you were to be told all the marvellous deeds she did it would
fill a book. in the end she was married and went to live in america.
she married a captain in the salvation army. probably she fascinated
him as much as she had the farmer's children.

but it would be a pity, whilst one is about it, not to mention another
of her great charms. on a sunday afternoon, when the work was all done
and she was dressed in her best, and wearing a silver locket, having
inside it the picture of her young man, the captain, she would begin
to rap, in a peculiar way, upon the kitchen table with her nails, and
this is what she said, keeping absolute time with the aforementioned
knockers,—

"go to bed, tom. go to bed, tom.
father and mother and everyone."

one day when she was in an extra good humour she showed the children
how to do it. and then it was glorious; you could just imagine them all
walking off to bed carrying a candle apiece.

there was a great deal of life going on about the farm—so, at least,
the children thought. at night, when the men-servants came in from
their day's work, it was really quite cheerful.

they used to sit at the wooden table. then there was oat bread, and
plain bread, and cheese, and beer, and milk, and porridge. upon these
occasions the girl always gave herself a few extra airs and graces.
she would sing little snatches of songs that did not belong to the
salvation army, and altogether her manner was different from what it
had previously been. those of the children who noticed this never
commented on it. she was a person with whom they could never take
liberties. the men-servants eyed her from a distance, but they never
thought of approaching nearer. they had respect for her, and then, of
course, they had been given to understand pretty early the mysteries of
the silver locket, and respected the other gentleman's claim.

one of them, who was the most good-natured and the best worker of
the lot, used at times to chaff her, but she took it with stolid
indifference, and so he gave it up. his name was bob, and he was
good-looking, with a square, open, ruddy face, bright blue eyes, and
fair hair. he could eat a quantity of cheese and bread, and a big basin
of porridge besides. the children used to sit round him on the form
whenever they got the chance. it was really marvellous the way he never
choked after gulping down a whole pint pot of beer.

the other men-servants were not so interesting. they couldn't ride a
horse like him, they couldn't walk like him, they couldn't laugh like
him. he was, in fact, about perfect. they were a very large family at
the farm—too large for a poor man, or rather too large for an unlucky
man.

the farmer had not started life a poor man, that is speaking
relatively. his grandfather had died a miller and maltster, leaving
a fortune of some few thousands. but the son could never make things
pay. his father had died when he was quite a boy, and his mother had
carried on the business very efficiently till her son was of age. he
had wished to enter a certain firm in a certain large town, but perhaps
the ambition had not been strong enough, or his stern mother's will had
been too strong, for he followed in his father's footsteps, and, like
him, could not, as has been said, make it pay.

he married young, a very pretty wife, and he was very proud of her,
and she of him. but there is little doubt he was unfortunate in his
marriage too. she had always been used to plenty at home, for her own
brothers (she was an orphan) were on the whole good business men. it
was considered when she married that she was doing very well. there had
always been a certain amount of pride and reserve about her husband's
family that held them up as very respectable. they were supposed to
have come of a good family, fond of fast living, who had fallen low.
her own brothers, especially her eldest one, were all prosperous men
doing well; and what more natural than that she should suppose the
same of her husband? she knew him to be clever, well liked, greatly
respected, and much consulted by everyone. she therefore had no doubts
at all that he was making money and laying by for future years.

so one by one the little children came, and had all to be provided
for. ten of them there were, and two died young. her own health failed
as well, for she had never been strong, and there is no question that
doctors' bills ran away with more money even than hungry mouths.

she was a wonderfully good housekeeper, scrupulously clean and neat
in everything. hospitable too; perhaps too hospitable, seeing her
husband was the same. hospitable people get encroached upon, you know.
the people who receive from them salve their consciences by making
themselves believe the givers are well off. like most beliefs it is
rotten, and worse than rotten.

however, her health failed, and after the birth of her last child she
was never much better than an invalid. but long before this the mill
had been given up and a farm taken. that was a very bad stroke of
business. farming in england so rarely pays, and millers on the whole
are prosperous.

so it was the farmer found himself at forty-four a poor man with a
large family. not that he would admit he was poor. he lived on the same
scale as he had always lived, and his wife never for one moment dreamt
it was a hard struggle to make headway.

he was reserved, and he was sensitive, and lacking in that courage and
determination which are essential to the business man. he loved peace
above all things, and though energetic and industrious he seemed to
have no power of bringing this energy and industry to good account.

when, therefore, his wife, now an invalid, tried expensive medicine
after medicine in the hopes of recovery, he paid the bills cheerfully
and never complained. and she, thinking the money always ready, would
take perhaps but a little of this, or a little of that, and leave the
rest untouched. it was the struggle to recover a lost constitution.
poor thing! who could blame her? and he—why, poor thing too!—he too
may be excused. but in the midst of this heavy strain upon his finances
there suddenly came heavy losses on the farm.

one year the potato crop entirely failed and other crops were poor
as well. then the cows had pneumonia, and several had to be killed.
seven calves were shot together in the little field at the back of the
farmyard. then the sheep had footrot, and after that two horses died,
and both were good and valuable. they were very dark days, terribly
dark days, but never one word of complaint was heard to pass the
farmer's lips.

had he been wise he would have given the farm up then and there and
have turned his sons out into some business, or at least his eldest
son. but, unfortunately, his eldest son was no good at figures or books
or lessons, and though he had the best intention in the world to work,
and much pluck in sticking to what he could do, he seemed incapable
of taking any situation that befitted his position as the son of a
well-to-do and much-respected farmer. the second son, a lad of about
sixteen, was absorbed heart and soul in the farm. he loved it, and he
worked well on it, therefore it was as well he should stay there. the
third boy was a mere child of twelve. but besides having to think for
his sons, the farmer had also to bear in mind his daughters, and of
these he had five.

the eldest was a girl of about eighteen. she was tall and pretty, with
a certain distinction that made people turn to look at her. the second
girl was about fourteen, good-natured and easy-going at that age, as
after. the third was a girl of about eleven, fond of dressing, fond of
admiration, impulsive and warm-hearted. the fourth was a girl of five.
very fat and very pretty. she was sturdy and fought to go to school
when she was three, so she went and stuck to it. the fifth was little
better than a baby, just turned four, puny and delicate.

so the farm was pretty full, you see, and it could be no light task to
provide suitably for them all.

chapter iii

the bedroom was still. a candle burned on the chimney-piece, but its
light was only feeble. in the bed lay a woman, wasted and weak, but at
present sleeping, and there was no one else in the room. downstairs,
supper was being served to the workers, and in the small sitting-room
the more grown-up members of the family sat. the children had gone
to bed and were asleep; the farmer was away at a meeting in the
neighbouring village.

and so the cold, shivering days of december, christmas and the new year
wore away. and with them silently and slowly the sufferer wore away
too. for months she had lain in bed, waiting and wasting, and now the
end of wait and waste was coming.

it had fallen to the lot of the second daughter to act as nurse, and
she fulfilled her part well. she was only a young girl, but had all a
girl's devotion. it fell to her daily task to read to the poor invalid
the litany from the prayer-book.

who could blame her if now and again she omitted long clauses? that
litany was so very long and dull, and the delight of skipping so
refreshing.

but even the litany with its many repetitions must at last have an
ending; and there came a day when it was no longer needed—for the poor
soul that besought its god to hear it and have mercy on it had gone to
take its peep behind the curtain.

it was bitterly cold in the first month of the new year, and there
upon the white bed lay the corpse. the smell of coffin wood and burial
flowers intermingled—white waxen flowers that looked a part of the
white waxen figure in the snowy shroud. beautiful and peaceful and
care-free was that thin face, now the restless fragment of life had
left it.

in the adjoining room, all alone upon the bed, sat deborah, the little
sickly baby. it wasn't very nice having anybody dead in the house—you
had all to go about quiet, and the rooms were dark.

just then the door opened, and in came deborah's eldest sister. she had
been crying.

"you may come with me to see mother," she said.

so together they went. marion held the younger sister up so that she
might see and kiss the dead face—and it was perhaps in that first
glance at the dead that she became conscious of her own life.

how beautiful, and strange, and far-away looked that weak and ailing
mother! she who had let you nestle beside her in the bed and kissed you
every night and morning. but now she was going away to heaven—to be
really beautiful and never to be ill any more.

after that life settled down pretty much as it had been before, and all
the usual little trivialities went on in the farm.

marion became mistress in her mother's place. susan was sent away to
school. elinor, and fat, chubby, sturdy maggie went to school near by,
and deborah, being the youngest, stayed at home.

it was very nice being at home all alone, as then she could wander
about the orchard and garden, and the yard and the lot, and be happy.
besides, there were nine special chickens to feed, and they were so
tame that they would let deborah carry them about; and she used to sit
upon the little stone slabs at the door and feed them—and they were so
greedy that they nearly upset the tin with the oatmeal paste in it, and
if she didn't look quick about it she nearly always missed her share,
for naturally she always ate a little with them. also they used to
drink in such a funny way, holding their heads up and letting the water
trickle down their throats, but though they were always hungry they
didn't often want to drink—so perhaps they belonged to the blue ribbon
army like the servant girl.

then there was the old grey cat. it was the most wonderful cat on the
earth, and the biggest. but alas! poor thing! it had seen bad days.
the girl (you will understand that to mean the servant) let some
scalding porridge fall on it one day, which made it so timid that for
a long time it would not come near anyone. and when it had got over
that catastrophe and was one day sneaking round the stable, probably
in search of mice, one of the horses struck out and kicked it on the
head. ever after that it walked about as if it had forgotten something,
and formed a great affection for deborah. they loved each other very
sincerely, and she used to nurse it by the hour together; it used to
lay its great head upon her little breast, and she for pure love used
to kiss its velvet ears.

besides, the grey cat was really so much better behaved than the black
cat. the black cat was cruel and wild and would think nothing of
killing and eating a mouse before your very eyes. moreover, it often
went away from home for six weeks at a time, and never left word where
it was going to, nor when it would come back; which was decidedly
bad manners, to say the least of it. and it was pretty certain that
it never went away for any good purpose, because after it came back
the least thing would frighten it, and it would fly off for the least
sound, just like some guilty person.

then there were the little bantams—two little bantam hens and a bantam
cock—they kept quite aloof from all the other big clumsy fowls, and
refused to let their small and pretty families mix with them.

then there was the fierce old sheep-dog, spring, who died. there was
a very grand funeral and a properly-dug grave. jack, the youngest
boy, acted as grave-digger, clerk and clergyman all in one; he was so
serious that he never saw anything the least bit funny about his work.
and there followed him to the grave-side, elinor, maggie and deborah,
all wearing a remnant of black.

they were strange days—curious dream-like days—and they followed each
other silently, like shadows over grain fields.

thus the time passed on, and gradually, gradually, the cloud darkened.

some said when his wife died the farmer showed every sign of
relief—perhaps, poor man, he did. in the ruin that was staring at
him he could face it better alone. she was not quite the woman to
invite, he not the man to give, confidences. oh, life! life! life! how
many couples are there that will face these things bravely? how much
selfishness would have to be torn from its very heart-roots! how much
narrow-heartedness and shallow depths have to be swept right away!

but, by the irony of fate, though he had escaped from his wife he could
not escape altogether from his family. he must provide for them and
look after them, ruin or no ruin.

accordingly, two years after his wife's death, he gave notice that he
was leaving the farm, but where he was going or what he was going to do
no one knew.

when it was heard that the farmer had given up the farm everybody
talked.

naturally people wondered what he was going to do; he was getting
middle-aged, they thought, and too old to start a new line of business.

the real fact probably was that he did not know what he was going to do
himself. he wished to get to some town and there try what luck would do
for him. experience had not yet taught him that he was essentially an
unlucky man.

along with all these worries for the farmer his children lived their
own little lives.

elinor had her photograph taken and went and spoiled the family album
by going into the parlour secretly and forcing all her photos (a round
dozen) into the empty spaces. she tore the paper and spoilt the album,
and you may be sure she did not get off lightly.

next, maggie found out whereabouts in this same wonderful parlour the
iced christmas cake was kept. she went quietly and helped herself to
the delicious sugar. at first they thought it was a mouse. so it was,
but just a little two-legged one, who was soon found out, and suffered
the natural penalty of such greed.

deborah, however, didn't do much in this interesting line. she had no
individuality, and it always needs individuality to err. at this time
she had more respect for the grey cat than for any human being, and
more love for the speckled chickens than anything beside. they made up
her small world and she was quite content; it would have been far too
much trouble to commit any of the faults common to childhood.

the farmer, in his spare time, taught her her lessons—and that was
the beginning of the great love she afterwards bore him. he bought her
a wonderful book with pictures and words in, and by the time she was
seven she could read and understand quite well.

just about this time a boy from the town came to stay with them. he
was a very well-to-do boy, and the son of very worldly people, and he
looked down greatly upon jane and the men-servants on the farm. but
he formed a great attachment for jack, the youngest son, probably as
being much older than himself, and able to teach him some wonderful
country games. he was a very curious boy and had what might be called a
wonderful conceit of himself.

one day he appeared before deborah with a very determined air.

"we've known each other nearly a week," he said decidedly, "so it's
quite time we were engaged."

"all right," she observed cheerfully, for it all seemed quite natural;
and she began to plan a place for him among the chickens in her
affection.

"yes," he went on, "but of course i sha'n't be able to give you much of
my time. i'm a boy, you know. some day i'll be a man, so my life will
be a much grander one than yours. you're only a girl."

"yes," remarked deborah, and accepted the inevitable with contentment.

"then if you like you can take a short walk with me now."

"all right," said deborah again. so they went.

for some days after that they took the usual short walk, till one day
he began in the same decided way.

"we've been engaged long enough. it's time we were married."

"but we're not old enough," said deborah. this was too quick work
altogether for one who always let things glide.

"yes, we are. besides, if i'm married to you now i shall feel bound in
honour to stick to you. otherwise, when i go away i may forget you."

it seemed a very terrible thing to be forgotten, so she consented.

"but how are we to do it?" she asked.

"oh! we stand together with the sky above us, and you must say to me,
‘bernard' (not bay, that's only short, you know) ‘bernard, i take you
to be my wedded husband'—and then i shall say to you, ‘deborah, i take
you to be my wedded wife.' after that it's all done and nothing but
death can part us."

so they went together to the old rustic, ear-wiggy seat in the garden,
and were married very solemnly. and he got his place among the chickens
in her heart, and what place she got in his it would be hard to tell,
as it was a very matter-of-fact union.

some days later he came with a more serious and thoughtful air.

"i'll tell you what i'm going to do," he said, sitting down upon the
floor and clasping his hands round his knees. "when i go home i'm going
to school. then when i'm old enough i shall be going to oxford. and
after that i'm going to india to shoot big game. then when i've made
a name i'll come home and marry you proper—on the very day you're
twenty-one."

now there was something very exciting about all that, which awoke even
phlegmatic deborah, the more so as she was too ignorant to understand
the half of it. even the grey cat got up to stretch itself, but after
blinking idly at the speaker it settled comfortably once more in
deborah's lap.

"what's oxford?" she asked curiously.

"oh!—er—it's a place where you go to learn to look down on everybody
who isn't as good as yourself," he answered, first with hesitation,
then with decision. "there's another place called cambridge where you
can go to learn the same thing," he added as an afterthought.

"but—it's not a good thing to learn, is it?"

"of course. if one is a gentleman one must know it, and let other
people know it too."

"what do you mean by big game?" she asked next.

"tigers and elephants," he answered, his eyes sparkling.

"and could you really shoot a tiger?"

"of course. just lend me that old cat, and i'll show you how it's
done," he said, springing up. but all deborah's instincts revolted at
the thought.

"no, indeed," she cried, and put as much of her two hands over it as
would go for protection.

"i won't hurt it. just you lend it to me and i'll—"

"i won't, it's got the headache and feels tired."

"got the headache!" exclaimed he with great contempt. "who ever heard
of a cat with the headache?"

"it has got the headache," she persisted. "darling kicked it—and it's
had the headache ever since."

"well, it's only a tame old thing, so it wouldn't do. but listen to me
and i'll tell you about shooting big game. i shall go on an elephant
right into the thickest part of the forest."

"how will you get up?"

"climb, of course, up a ladder. then in the thickest part of the forest
i shall suddenly see two eyes like fire shining down at me. then i
shall take my gun—one—two—three. at the third shot it will fall
mortally wounded. and then, so that everybody may really know i've
really shot the tiger, i shall have it skinned, and bring the fur home."

"but suppose instead it killed you," observed deborah, who by this time
was fully roused to the possibilities of such an event.

"well, you see, i shall have to be a pretty good shot before i could
think of going out. and after that—well, a man with a gun, who knows
how to use it, is a match for a tiger any day."

they became very great friends indeed, and took the short walks
together every day most religiously, till at last the time came for his
going away.

they met each other in the kitchen lobby when there was no one there,
and kissed several times very sadly. deb wiped her eyes with the corner
of her small pinafore, but he kept up manfully.

"i'll come back when—i've shot the big game—and—you're twenty-one,
you know."

but he never shot the big game, and he never came back.

chapter iv

once more night was reigning, but the frost had gone. it was cold, but
with the chilliness of late spring, not winter, and the gusty wind blew
heavy clouds across the sky. a rainy mist hid the mountains, and added
darkness to the already dreary night.

and even as the night was indistinct and gloomy, the spirits were
indistinct and gloomy too. the soughing, sighing wind as it passed
among the branches was miserable, but then it is this same dreary wind,
they say, that purifies and clears the air.

"the old home, as they call it, is to be broken up," said plucritus.
"the farm was a very bad speculation. it has never paid."

"who is to blame?" asked genius.

"why, the farmer. he is one of those delightfully amusing and
interesting men so rarely met, who can legislate better for other
people than for themselves. he gives other people advice gratis, they
take it and prosper. he gives himself advice, and follows it, then
fails."

"yet," said genius, slowly, "i respect and like the farmer. he is a man
of well balanced and proportioned judgment."

"oh, yes. that makes him the more interesting. he's a bad speculator,
that's all. personally, i am not particularly fond of him, you know."
genius laughed.

"that should be a mark in his favour," he said.

plucritus laughed in turn.

"well, no. i am not fond of him, but i'm going to cultivate his
acquaintance more. when i am interested in a man i always cultivate his
acquaintance. humanity is so very interesting."

"thousands of years have not altered it then for you?"

plucritus shook his head.

"oh, no. we tire of our playthings but do not lose our interest in the
game. besides, where you are i must of necessity be."

"but you mistake. i am not with the farmer, i am simply bound to have
an interest in one of his children."

"and i have an interest in the same child, and therefore through that
child an interest in the farmer. not that i can do much, but still i
can watch the game, and help when needed."

"you do not mean to work him any harm?"

"oh, no. i am powerless to work real harm, you know, being but an
inferior power. let him but pray to god almighty and he's pretty safe."

"yet to-night i am gloomy and ill at ease."

hereat plucritus burst out laughing.

"you're a fool," he said. "why don't you go away and leave them?
tawdry, poor and plebeian—what are you dreaming about? go away now and
you are doing the greatest kindness; stay, and you will only create
misery and death. you can go to hundreds who will repay and appreciate
your presence—whilst where you are you will never be understood. the
sight of that child's puny face and figure sickens me. you are going
the right way to make yourself the laughing-stock of all.

"these people are going from here to the town, to live a very humdrum,
miserable, ground-down sort of life. there will be nothing elevating,
nothing intellectual—nothing in the least refined about it. there will
be a great deal of nonsense talked about refinement, the sort of thing
you abhor, but no true refinement in itself."

"all the more reason then why i should stay to make up the deficit."
but a shadow crossed the face of genius.

"will you _stay_, or will you _go?_" plucritus had reached
across the wooden seat, and as he whispered the words his hot breath
blew upon the cheek of genius like some unwholesome fever-blight in a
pestilential marshland.

"i will stay."

"fool, fool that you are, and rightly mated with a fool. stay then and
become a kind of circus-clown, a kind of punchinello with a hump—not
meeting with applause like him though, but with jeers and scorn, the
only thing you're fit for."

and away he went, and the blood-red rays from the blood-red ring
flashed round about him like a blood-red sulphur cloud.

"why is he so eager for my departure?" asked genius, turning to
virginius, who stood there silently as ever.

"he has his own reasons doubtless, but they are hard to fathom."

virginius came and sat down beside genius. "but you will stay. duty
demands that you should stay—and i can say, or beg, or ask no more."

"yes, i will stay."

"shall you care for the change, do you think?"

"to me, as you know, it is immaterial." then virginius smiled. "i
apologise sincerely for my apparent disinterestedness, but like your
human soldier i am bound to take the country as i find it. all my
energies are bent on reconnoitring and organising; there is nothing
left for ‘buts' and ‘ifs.'"

"it seems to me, virginius, if you would but stoop to make yourself
agreeable, and put on some little affability, you might be a ready
match for plucritus and the rest of them."

but before this the cold and stern expression had returned.

"the trickery of bribery is beyond me," he observed.

"beneath you, you mean," said genius, somewhat sorrowfully. "i can
understand it."

virginius now rose, and began pacing back and forwards upon the
rock-crowned hill-top. the wind still cried in misery, and big drops of
rain fell upon the earth.

for some time silence prevailed, till at last virginius broke it.

"genius, i am going to make a request; i am going to ask you to look at
me."

"that is easily done. i have fulfilled it."

"no. i am going to ask you to look at me. when i am most silent, look
at me most."

"that is precisely where the difficulty comes. plucritus is so
essentially interesting and fascinating that he attracts attention
entirely to himself."

"you will see less of his fascination in the future. you have thwarted
him and he dislikes you. you see you are not working as an immaterial
power."

"what a topsy-turvy rendering," said genius, and he laughed. "no, i am
working in the concrete—with a child. the child has a mind so pliant
that it bends to my slightest whim most unconsciously."

"that child also, besides having a mind, has what, in this world, they
honour with the name of soul."

"oh, yes, but that's the unknown quantity over which one half the
world stumbles blindly and the other half develops itself into a
superstitious bigot."

"you make sweeping statements."

"contempt for the world has taught me it."

"i should advise you to restrain that contempt. but let us return. in
the same way that you exercise a strong power over the mind, so do i
exercise a strong power over what is called the soul."

"yours is the harder work," said genius, and he laughed.

"yes, the task is always difficult and delicate. but this child is not
particularly addicted to any particular sin. that is in a measure owing
to you. you have a knack of absorbing vices to a certain degree within
yourself—in the same way that you absorb passions, thoughts, and even
actions."

"well, let us proceed. what does this lead to?"

"simply this. i wish to warn you. plucritus dislikes you because you
have thwarted him; he dislikes the child because its natural tendency
is more toward good than evil; and he dislikes me because i am his
natural and his greatest enemy."

"well, a triple alliance should certainly overcome him."

"there is no alliance," replied virginius, earnestly. "i am
unable to make alliances except those which spring from unstinting
self-denial and self-sacrifice. our alliance now would be simply one of
self-defence, and that to me is impossible."

"then," cried genius, seriously, "i suppose it means we have each to
fight the devil separately."

"that is what it means. i wish to impress this on you as it is the last
time we shall meet for many years and be able to converse as friends."

"then you are able to foretell the future."

"no. i simply watched plucritus when he spoke, and by long experience i
have learnt somewhat of his tactics."

chapter v

the farmer and his family left the old north-country farm and went to
live in a large town some sixty miles away.

to the children at first this was all delightfully new. the house was
bigger, the rooms higher, and altogether it was wonderfully strange.
hot water upstairs and down was a tremendous luxury, and a bath into
which maggie and deborah could both get together, and still leave
room for elinor if she had also a mind to come, seemed really too
miraculously funny for words. but when you looked outside it was not
so inviting. to be sure there were trees in the garden opposite, and
very pretty gardens and trees belonging to the houses at the back, but
there was nothing loose, nor wild, nor natural about them. they hadn't
breathed the scent of air blown off the fells, nor drunk of the rain
whose clouds had blown across the cumbrian mountains. no, they were
simply city trees and city grass, and gave one a feeling of unrest and
unhappiness one could scarcely understand, for at the time you didn't
understand that you were comparing them with a fuller, freer growth far
away. and here there was no interesting servant to impress them with
her conversation. and no milk, nor porridge, nor fowls, nor chickens,
nor anything that there had been before. the old grey cat had been
given away, and only the best of the furniture transplanted. so that
at the bottom there was something distinctly sad about this new home.
however, they settled down, and after a time things looked a bit more
ship-shape.

then came the vital question—where were the children to go to school?

opposite their house was a semi-detached villa in which lived three
ladies who conducted a private school. it was eminently respectable,
indeed select, and just the place for the three younger girls to be
sent to. about five minutes' walk away was a large church school, very
respectable and in good working order, and also well conducted, but
still supplying only elementary education.

marion determined they should go to the former. their father, for once,
was resolved they should attend the latter.

it was a very uncomfortable time.

"they will grow into little common vulgar things," said she.

"they will get a sound education," said he.

but that had no attraction for her—perhaps she did not quite
understand the phrase.

so matters went on, and after a terrible deal of argument the children
went to the elementary school. their father took them himself, and
elinor confidently, though privately, affirmed afterwards that the
schoolmistress fell in love with him, though on what grounds it would
be hard to say. elinor loved to circulate stories like this—it added
zest to life. this precocious young lady had previously gathered maggie
and deborah together and admonished them.

"now you're not to speak to any of the children at this new school
we're going to. they're very common, and if you talk to them you'll
grow as common as they. now do you hear, maggie? you're to make no
friends at all."

"all right," said maggie.

"aren't we to speak to them if they speak to us?" piped deborah.

"of course not. now remember. at dinner-time i shall ask you."

how maggie fared deborah never knew, but she herself fared badly.

she was placed next to a very loquacious child to whom pride,
_that_ kind of pride, was a sealed book.

"yer'll need-a-bag ter keep yer books in like me," said she.

no answer.

"d'ye 'ear? yer'll need-a-bag."

"ye-es."

"yer new, aren't yer?"

"ye-es."

then she began stroking deborah down the back in a most friendly manner.

"is this yer frock or yer pinnifore?"

"it's my frock."

"sara jenkins, come out, you're talking," came the sound of a teacher's
voice across the class.

"please it was me," said deborah, getting up, trembling in every limb.

"sit down. sarah jenkins, come out."

so out went sarah and received two raps with a cane. she came back
howling and wringing her hands, but she soon recovered.

"have you ever had the toffee stick?" she asked.

"what's that?" queried deb.

"why, the cane. yer don't know nothing."

"no," said deborah, meekly.

"shut up—she's looking at us."

deborah reddened painfully. it was the first time she had ever been
told to "shut up" by a stranger.

thus the time passed till twelve o'clock.

the three children waited for each other.

"did you speak to anyone, maggie?" asked elinor, imperatively.

"oh, no," replied maggie, and looked straight ahead.

"did you, deborah?"

"i—i only said ‘thank you' when a girl lent me a pencil."

"there was no need."

on the second day elinor altered her order.

"you can speak to the other children," she said. "some of them are
really very nice."

but elinor was a cure.

she was up to as many antics as the day was long, and formed a
friendship with all the pupil-teachers of that school, keeping them for
the most part screaming with laughter, or open-eyed with astonishment.
for the particular mistress who taught her she formed a more reverent
attachment.

one day deborah came across her just before school time, busy stuffing
the front of her bodice with brown paper.

"what are you doing?" she asked languidly.

"well, you see, miss so-and-so has a remarkably good bust, and i want
to be more like her," she answered.

"but you're not going to school like that," said deborah, still with
the same half-interest, as she saw elinor fastening her buttons over
the crude padding.

"of course i am. what's wrong with me?"

"oh, nothing," but she eyed her with mild astonishment.

all that afternoon the pupil-teachers were a mixture of giggles and
laughter, but elinor looked as serious as a judge, and as matronly as
if she were her own mother.

a little while after this a mouse ran out in her particular class,
causing most naturally great excitement.

"oh! oh! miss montague, there it is just behind you! there, behind your
foot! oh! oh! it's run up your petticoat!" and elinor ran out to shake
her skirts. "there, it's run under the desk." but it had really run
under the desk long since, only elinor had grown tired of the monotony
of sitting still, and the others enjoyed it immensely; to see the
dignified teacher skipping about thinking the mouse was on her was to
them delightful.

elinor did not stay long at school—she left in about a year. she
had never made much progress there, lessons evidently not being her
particular _forte_.

the only thing she had perhaps really learnt was to recite gray's
"elegy," and even miss montague gave her credit for being able to do
that.

the school lives of maggie and deborah afterwards became fairly calm.
marion also was reconciled to the inevitable, chiefly no doubt because
one of the clergymen sent his son to the same school soon afterwards,
and upon that there followed a doctor's daughter. this girl made great
friends with maggie and deborah, and the friendship lasted for a good
many years. but she at least was strong enough to keep to the rule of
never speaking to any other girls but as inferiors.

when she first came her mother had expressly forbidden that she should
be caned; consequently the other girls detested, even hated her.

deborah out of school soon forgot all about all this. she never formed
any friendships except with those girls who distinctly put themselves
out of the way to approach her, and these naturally were very few.

there were two things only that made up her world. one was love for
her father, and the other, love of a world created out of involuntary
dreams.

together with her love for her father went a strong religious tendency;
she had a great belief in the goodness of god and the love of christ.

instinctively deborah felt the cloud that was hanging over them, yet
could not account for it.

for the first two years after leaving the country her father had
answered various advertisements, and gone personally in search of
situations, but nothing ever came of them. then came a third year,
one of the dullest and gloomiest that could be imagined. there was
very little to live on, and only those who have had to live on nothing
and yet appear as if they lived on something can fully understand its
miseries.

perhaps the saddest and most miserable thing of all was to see the
farmer in his best black coat. it had grown very brown and old and out
of fashion, and because he had grown thinner it seemed rather to hang
on him. there had been a time in the country when he regularly went to
church in it night and morning, for he had been a churchwarden nearly
twenty years. but now he never went to church at all. he read the bible
at home some times instead. you see he had no top hat; the one that
formerly shone so well and looked so smooth was now shabby and old,
and how could a man who had regularly gone to church in a silk hat for
twenty years and was now growing old ever accustom himself to go there
in anything inferior?

besides, he had no money, and once when deborah, with a child's
pointedness, had asked him why he never went to church now, he
replied,—

"one's clothes are too shabby, and it looks badly to put nothing in at
the collection."

when he said it he had looked out of the window and she only saw the
back of his head, which was growing very white and bald.

on a week day he wore an old grey coat, which was also too big for him,
and it was also very, very shabby.

but deborah loved that old grey coat, it was somehow or other so very
like him, and he used to wear it in the country; only then it had not
been frayed at the corners as it was now.

at night, when she came home from school, he always helped her with her
lessons. he used to rule the lines with a round ruler, and he never
ruled them crooked nor made a smudge, as she was always doing. but it
must have been a bitterly miserable and humiliating time to him; he had
never been idle in his life before, and now there seemed absolutely
nothing for him to do.

his second son had gone to america, whilst he had placed his third
in an engineering office. he had congratulated himself upon this last
stroke of business, and felt confident he had given him a good start in
life; but very curiously, very depressingly, the whole thing went smash
just about this time and added to the general misery.

jack, therefore, went for a while to stay with an uncle in the country
and do his book-keeping.

of the girls, marion stayed at home to look after the house, whilst
susan took a situation as mother's help. but it was a very unsuitable
place and she was obliged to leave. however, from there she went to a
children's hospital to nurse. this was at eighteen. she stayed there
for several years and then went into one for adults. afterwards she
took up private nursing and got on very nicely.

elinor, when straits came to a very bad pass, was sent to learn
dressmaking. from the accounts she brought home they seemed to be very
strange kind of people, and perhaps she was right, as once when she
landed at the place in the morning it was to find they had decamped,
which naturally brought her home in the greatest state of excitement.

maggie and deborah continued at school, being too young to leave it.

"the end of it will be we shall all have to turn out and become
servants," marion used to say.

that seemed a terrible thing. they had not been brought up to think
that a servant is as good or as bad as a duchess. but then—who ever is?

and so the time dragged on.

after a time their father began to go regularly to town each morning,
and things at home began to look a bit brighter.

it's wonderful what a change a little money can make after absolutely
none; one feels one has a right to live in the world where otherwise
one would be far better out of it.

next, the greatest thing was that the farmer was able to buy a new suit
and a new hat. he looked quite a gentleman again and was once more able
to attend the church.

still, though the cloud had lifted it had not by any means dispersed;
only they had become so accustomed to the deep gloom that this partial
lift seemed like the bright sunshine.

chapter vi

in the front bedroom the gas had been lit and lowered. the objects in
the room showed obscurely, till suddenly there flashed into it three
lights—one purest white, one blending every colour of the rainbow, one
brilliant red—but after the first clear flash more dusky.

plucritus leant his hand upon the wall and looked upon a picture. it
was quite a small one—a simple print—but when the glowing light
around him shone on it, it seemed to gain life and size out of all
proportion to the room.

"there! what do you think of my picture?" said he, turning to genius.

"your picture? it belongs to me," he answered. and there was evident
annoyance in his tone.

"pardon," replied plucritus, lightly. "you and i lately seem rather
to have rubbed each other and quarrelled over trifles. this is a
little print in black and white—not worth a farthing—it is in an old
frame scarce worth a cent. it is therefore worthy of the flames—and
therefore, by most biblical reasoning, it belongs to me."

"the bible be damned!" said genius, striking his hand upon the maple
bed-post. "i say it belongs to me."

"virginius, he has _damned_ the bible," commented plucritus,
ignoring the last remark. he spoke in a half-serious, half-comic tone,
with just a little heightening of surprise in it.

"no," said genius, quickly recovering himself. "i simply wanted to
express an opinion upon biblical reasoning."

"but still for all that you have damned the bible."

"you enjoy the repetition."

"well, it sticks to me. it is but a trifle; but then i remember
trifles—life is made up of them."

"yes. it is for that precise reason that i demand the rights of the
picture. it belongs to me."

"oh, i see. you wish it to stand as a kind of object-lesson picture. is
that it?"

"exactly."

"then i give way at once. i did not quite understand you. i thought you
meant to monopolise the personages represented in it."

"well, so i do," asserted genius, smiling. "they are in some ways very
nearly allied to me."

"indeed?" said plucritus, affecting astonishment.

"indeed and indeed," replied the other. "the spirit who accompanies the
man in this picture is my twin brother—at least i please to think so."

"how you must feel for him," said plucritus, sympathetically.

"but do you know, genius, without wishing to tread on your corns in the
least, i must admit to being a little vain."

"of what?"

"well, of my histrionic powers."

"ha! you had better be careful. i am very jealous;" but he was laughing.

"yes," continued the other. "i can manage acting with the exact ease
and precision with which you can manage it yourself."

"well, let me see some of your acting," remarked genius, "so that i may
judge of your opinion of yourself."

"i shall be only too delighted. now, as you know, deborah is coming to
bed in a few moments."

"yes, i am waiting for that. it is then that the real teaching begins,
the only kind she truly appreciates."

"but for all that you do not monopolise the whole of her attention.
deborah has some little regard for her father."

"a very strong affection," affirmed genius.

"as you will, but please do not look so serious. the thing i am going
to show you is purely farcical."

"plucritus," said virginius, speaking for the first time, "i must ask
you to leave this alone; the child is not old enough to fight the
battle."

"fight it yourself then. what else are you here for?" he answered.

there was silence, and there came swimming through the mind of genius
the words of virginius—"when i am most silent, look at me most." but
though he looked he saw nothing.

just then the door opened and deborah came in.

the room was dark, as the gas was very low, but after groping about she
managed to turn it up.

then she began to unfasten her frock, and was very soon ready for bed.
when ready, she knelt down to pray.

plucritus now stepped forward and sat down by the bedside. he took her
two hands in his very tenderly.

"debbie," said he, "don't you think it would be a very good thing to
pray for your father?" his voice was so low that it sounded just like
sweetness.

"oh, yes. but i don't know how. i can only think it."

"well, listen to me and i will tell you. say this after me."

so she clasped her hands very tightly and closed her eyes.

"_please, god, let father live a very, very long time._"

"please, god, let father live a very, very long time," she repeated.

"_and let him be very, very happy._"

"and let him be very, very happy."

"_let the business that he goes to every day be a very prosperous
one._"

"let the business that he goes to every day be a very prosperous one."

"_and let his death-bed be a bed of roses._"

"and let his death-bed be a bed of roses."

"_and let me soon grow up to work for him._"

"and let me soon grow up to work for him."

"_and let me be with him always._"

"and let me be with him always."

"_and let me be with him when he dies to comfort him._"

"and let me be with him when he dies to comfort him."

"please, god, oh, please, god, do. amen."

she added that last line herself, she was so frightened he might
be hurrying off somewhere else and think she only meant it a good
three-quarters instead of a brimming-over whole.

but during the prayer virginius had drawn very near, and just before
the ending he placed his hand upon the kneeler's head and deborah felt
a sudden thrill of pure happiness run through her.

scarcely, however, had his hand touched her head than plucritus with
his free hand tried to wrench it off, and not only tried but succeeded,
and a feeling of intense misery followed the thrill of joy.

"it is because i love him so, and i dread the thought that he should
ever die," she said; and then she prayed it all over again still more
fervently.

"god is love, and god is good," she said. "and he loves father because
he's good too, and so he'll look after him real well," and then she got
up feeling very comforted.

plucritus turned to genius.

"how did i manage it?" he asked.

"i suppose i need not tell you," genius answered. "ah! what have you
done?"

"you should have been watching," said plucritus. "you are just too
late."

once more he had turned the curious dull red light upon the picture,
and changed it by this glamour till it seemed almost life-size. and
deborah, led by what she did not understand, looked across at it.
it had been put there for the first time that day, and was a simple
representation of a wooded terrace and a garden. on the broad steps a
woman stood, upon the ground a man—dressed for a period some three
hundred years ago.

deborah looked and looked again, and then with a sudden start, the
colour rising to her cheeks and the light to her eyes, she walked
across to it.

"how funny! how very funny!" she exclaimed, and looked at the picture
for a long time without speaking. then she looked at the words
underneath it, and they were:—

"against my wish i am sent to bid you come to dinner."
"fair beatrice, i thank you for your pains."
"i took no more pains for those thanks than you took pains
to thank me."

"how curious," said deborah. "i suppose these words are what they're
saying to each other. how beautiful they look! just like the people in
my world."

then hearing someone calling she put the light low and got into bed.

deborah, once in bed, was happy. the day was over and done; that long,
half-miserable day in which you were never sure from one minute to the
next whether you were going to be punished for some offence you hadn't
done. for then it was that genius, taking the child in his arms, showed
her all those pictures and scenes that she so loved.

from this earth she flew away to another just as real, where the people
lived and talked like us; only not quite like the people she met every
day, as deborah's life was bound up in the church-school walls and the
poverty-stricken home.

indeed she loved the other world far more passionately and clung to it
far more faithfully than ever she loved or clung to this.

"i love to watch them and listen to them," she used to whisper to
herself. "they never bother to notice me nor try to send me away, and
that is what i like."

and watching them along with deborah from the very earliest times was
always a crowd of grown-up school-children.

"why don't they go away?" she used to ask herself. "no one asked them
to come. they're too inquisitive by far. but though they look in some
ways like school-children they are quite grown up, and they behave far
better and are far quieter than ever school-children are."

no wonder deborah loved this other world.

it had in it every glorious blended colour of the rainbow, and was
essentially so different from the life she led herself.

still, though she gave almost all her time, consciously or
unconsciously, to this other world, she did occasionally spare some of
it for thoughts upon religion.

it would, perhaps, have been impossible to find a child with a stronger
belief in god's power and goodness, or one who tried to walk in the
right path more earnestly.

but along with it she was constantly trying to gauge the depth of her
own truth and feeling.

on this particular night of the hanging of the picture she was
especially wakeful.

"now i wonder whom i really do love best," she said to herself, "god or
father?"

"you love your father best," said a voice.

but because it was very low and even, she thought it must be the devil.

"i don't," she answered; "i love them differently, that's all. father
lets me kiss the back of his head, but god i worship."

"did you hear that?" said plucritus, turning to virginius. "that is
capital. ‘god i worship.' why are you not more clever? when i speak
she takes me for an angel; when you speak she makes sure you are the
devil."

chapter vii

the appearance of prosperity on the farmer's part lasted for just
about two years. during that time maggie won a scholarship and went to
another school. deborah still remained at the old one, and still did
the old home-lessons.

it was with great joy she once came home to say she had got the prize
for these same home-lessons, and her greatest pride was that half the
glory of it all was father's. and he was just as pleased. poor man!
he didn't get much success, so who could grudge him that? and he went
to see her get it, though he didn't often go to that kind of thing;
and she had been so very nervous for fear she should make a mistake in
going up and so make him ashamed of her. but the gentleman who gave the
prizes had patted her ever so kindly on the head and he said he thought
the home-lesson prize the best prize of the lot, for it showed the
people at home took interest in the children's work.

after that the children at the school wrote an essay on kindness to
animals for a prize given by the well-known society for the prevention
of cruelty to animals.

naturally deborah wrote one too. and the farmer put himself out greatly
to gather together material for her to write upon. he looked up
anecdotes, and told her some of his own personal experiences. and who
could have had more personal experience than he? why, he had been one
of the best drivers in the country round, and the horses just seemed to
know when he held the reins, and curved their necks and champed their
bits accordingly.

but no, there was no prize gained for that; the solitary prize they
gained between them was that little book for home-lessons. he was
disappointed, though he never admitted to it. however, he took her face
in his two hands and said,—

"never mind, we'll try again some other time."

he had arranged that she and maggie should be teachers, and because she
had perfect trust in him she thought that teaching was the finest thing
in life. besides, he and she had arranged that when she grew up and he
was getting old (she could never bear to think of that, though) they
were going to live together.

"i'll make him so really happy," she used to say to herself, "that he
won't know he is not walking on velvet carpets all the while," and she
meant it.

matrimony had no attractions for deborah.

"how anybody can go and live with a strange man they haven't known all
their lives i don't know," she used to ponder occasionally. and she
used to sigh.

"i expect it's because their fathers are not half so good as mine. i
never met anybody, not anybody, half so perfect."

so the time went on. and every night, since that first night at the
beginning of the two years, when she had uttered the prayer for him,
she still continued to pray. repetition instead of weakening only
strengthened it. nightly the silent tears would squeeze themselves
between her closed lids because she felt it all so strongly. and every
night she rose from her knees comforted. it was as if god stood there
and said: "yes, i will take care of him. he has been very good and very
patient through all his losses and failures. and now i am going to let
his last years be very happy ones. only trust in me, and have faith."

one night after this fervent prayer deborah got into bed feeling in
love and charity with all men.

now, she was very frightened of the dark. "i feel as if when i'm in
the dark there are things pressing all round me," she used to say to
herself, "so that i cannot breathe." but she had also been told by
various members of the family that people who were frightened of the
dark had evil consciences. therefore she used to try to overcome this
excessive fear by earnest prayer.

on this particular night, however, she seemed for once to have got
the better of her fear, as she neither closed her eyes nor pulled the
bed-clothes very high about her head.

the real truth was she had got on to one of her favourite lines of
thought—the devil.

"i can't understand the devil," she said half aloud. "i think he's a
silly old thing. the idea of him setting himself up to fight against
god! why, he might know he'd be beaten any day. i'm not the least bit
frightened of him with his ugly horns and hoofs—he doesn't seem to
know whether he's a man or a cow." and she laughed.

but before the laugh had ended a curious sensation came creeping over
her. it was as if something were compelling her to look at the foot of
the bed, and she looked.

the light was pretty low, yet high enough for her to discern the
objects around; but by the lower bed-post there was an unfamiliar
shadow.

deborah felt as if some power beyond herself was dragging her up in bed.

"sit up," said the voice.

"but—" she gasped.

"no buts," said the voice.

so she sat up, grasping the pillow behind her with both hands, and for
the first time in her life, and perhaps the last, she knew what it was
to feel her hair literally rising.

and there—yes, deborah never forgot it—there stood the dark, dusky
form so different from that which her imagination pictured.

her first wild longing was to get up and run, crying for help, but
every limb seemed frozen.

"what! will you run away from that which you have laughed at?" said the
even voice. "look!"

she looked.

it was a face and figure to remember, just above medium height, not
too tall. one arm rested on the bed-post, and he was slightly leaning
towards the bed. but the face. every feature was perfect and most
finely cut. the chin a little square, though more inclined to oval. the
mouth proud and firm, with lips bent into a cruel and perpetual smile.
the nose straight and strong and perfect. the forehead high and with
one deep wrinkle. but the eyes—who, having seen them, could forget
them? they were the only thing about him that was not human. they were
deep-set, gloomy, cruel, far-reaching, and yet not the least like human
eyes. they seemed as if they showed you things, terrible things, too
awful to be spoken of.

and deborah, held by a power much stronger than herself, looked right
into them, into those great black sombre dusky balls of hidden fire,
and they returned the stare.

suddenly she began to find the feeling of extreme fear passing.

and gradually as it had come the vision melted, but deborah still
continued to sit up in bed.

"i wonder what the angels were about to let him get in," she thought,
her heart still beating hard. "and when i said ‘jesus christ' he never
moved a bit. but he hadn't any horns as they always give him in the
pictures. i wonder how i knew it was the devil. i expect because he
looked so horribly dark and bad. i'd best sit up for fear he returns."

she sat up, and some time afterwards she heard her father coming to
bed. she called him in just to have the light turned up and see a human
being again, and after that she lay down and slept peacefully.

still, though deborah remembered the scene for ever after she never by
any chance mentioned it to anyone.

"they would only say i imagined it," she said, "and laugh at me for
believing in a ghost. besides, if i did tell them they wouldn't
understand, as it wasn't a ghost."

and after a time the incident slipped back into the dim recesses of her
memory, only to be called back at a later date.

chapter viii

two years had passed away, and the january of the third had begun. the
scene was once again upon the hillside, a bright starlit night in
january 1889. but the same miserable wind of two years back was moaning
through the trees, and well it might.

on the broken seat sat genius all alone, his head bent in his hands,
unconscious of the wind, the cold, the night.

whilst he sat thus thoughtful plucritus glided silent on the scene.
the blood-red light from the blood-red ring shone round about him in
glorious, feverish light. there was nothing dull nor dark about it now.

"ho! you here, genius? how disappointing! i came for a little quiet
midnight stroll far from the haunts of spirits and of men, only to meet
with you."

"liar!" and looking up genius revealed a face fraught with all pain and
suffering.

"call me what names you will, i am in glorious form to-night. i have
compassed death and bound a captive, spreading much suffering."

"ay. and be careful in that same net you get not bound yourself,"
genius observed, springing up.

"threats are like foam on water—idle and useless when applied to me. i
have been with the farmer through all his so-called agony, and it was
very fine."

"is he then dead?"

"oh! dead as these sodden leaves beneath us is his body. drowned in
the winter water. i was with him to the end. i whispered in his ear
his many sins, i and my brother. and when the end came the heavens
were shining bloody red around the dying sun, and their ironical glory
struck even him."

"and well they might," said genius, speaking huskily, "and well they
might."

"once i remember when he was a lad he fell in the mill dam and was
dragged out more dead than living. later in life, perhaps some fifteen
years ago from now, he went to london with a friend to look round an
exhibition. as they stood watching some machinery working the thing
exploded. by curious fate the friend beside him was killed upon the
spot, but he remained untouched. he returned to the country alone.
the one was taken and the other left. is it not strange that he whom
providence twice spared as by a miracle should in the end have come to
curse his birth and take his life?"

"yes, it is strange," replied genius, "and passing strange. devil
incarnate! how much had you to do with it?"

"why, everything and nothing. it was my little fire-fly, my glorious
will-o'-the-wisp that danced among the dark and blackened branches.
ting! ting! the magic music played, clear and entrancing. ‘providence
has spared you once. providence has spared you twice. all for what?
can it be that you are kept—simply just to be bereft of all life's
pleasures? ting! ting! no. no. try again! this only once.' tinkle!
tinkle! and he tried—only once—only once—on, on, to the bitter
end—when the clear ball burst."

as plucritus spoke he moved about from spot to spot, laughing at almost
every line. "poor, misguided fool! how he shuddered and paled when fate
raised the pall and showed him his own death of shame. how he stared
aghast and hollow-eyed when he understood the trickery played on him!"
and he laughed again.

"have you no mercy nor consideration?"

"well, yes. of the bread-poultice sort. i put it on luke-warm and
forget to remove it when cold. it sends such a delicious feeling of
ill-comfort through the sufferer. poor genius! poor tricked fool! poor
poser of impossible virtues! why are you here?"

"because at present i am not wanted elsewhere."

"and why so melancholy? are you not thankful for a holiday? away from
all the tawdry narrowness, you should shine. now listen to me." and
suddenly he turned and came and sat upon the seat.

"i am listening. but keep that damned light of yours out of my sight."

"oh, certainly." and with a sudden movement all had darkened.

"now listen to me. for the last twelve years or more you have been a
failure. you have been placed in soil in which you do not thrive—soil
having very little nutriment."

"pardon me," said the other, laughing scornfully. "the duller the
background the brighter and clearer the picture shines. mind your own
business and leave me to mind mine."

"i am minding my own business, and your business is mine, and i am
capable of managing both," replied plucritus.

"well, continue."

"i say you are in the wrong place. go away. leave her. i can put you
where you can be far better thought of, far better loved."

"and could you find me a more unconscious or more loving pupil?"

"i could find you a more appreciative one," plucritus answered quickly.

"that is not the point, and i prefer for once to stay."

"it is sheer pig-headedness."

"exactly. the pig has always interested me. have you anything more to
say?"

"what! you will stay with the daughter of a thief?"

"even so."

"he who took the widow's substance that was trusted to him?"

"even so."

"you will stay with the daughter of the coward and the suicide?"

"even so."

"are you thinking what you're saying?"

"even so."

"when, may i ask you, are you going to move the curse?"

"when the time comes."

"you will not move it, you will deepen it."

"i will argue it when the time comes."

"genius," said the other one after a pause, and in a different voice,
"i do not think you fully appreciate the extent of my powers."

"perhaps i do not."

"i—i am stronger than you think," he went on warily.

"i think i can fathom the depth of your strength."

just then the white light flashed across the ground and showed
plucritus in the act of throwing back his head and laughing silently.

"ha! what are you up to now?" asked genius, hastily. but in an instant
plucritus had flashed the counter red light on the scene.

"there is virginius somewhere round about. i was laughing in the dark
to be reminded of the farmer's death. thinking that justice at last
would have its day."

"the farmer is not damned?"

"oh! excellently damned. irrevocably damned," and plucritus laughed.
"now comes the farce ironical. i am most interested in my prayer.
to-night and last night it has altered slightly. there are no more
prayers for a prosperous business, no more prayers for a happy
death-bed, no more prayers for a long life and lasting happiness.
it's all merged into one insane and childish cry ‘_god, bring him
back—oh, please, god, do!_'"

"when will they know the actual facts?"

"on wednesday, i think. i am going to be merciful, you see, and bring
him back. his crossing to ireland simply meant more expense. the dock
wall or the river would have answered any day. but that has nothing to
do with my present quest. i have come to ask you for the last time,
will you go or stay?"

genius rose, and round him shone his own warm, dazzling lights all
intermingled.

"had you been kinder i might have acted differently. but you forget, or
reason is at fault. they say on this earth that such as i are born in
pain; rightly or wrongly i would not presume to say. but as it is this
suffering simply draws the sufferer nearer to me."

"and farther off from god."

"as you will. that is virginius's duty, none of mine. why do you laugh?"

"you speak so innocently, so childishly, you make me laugh."

"i understand you," answered genius, with some slight contempt. "it is
useless bandying words with you."

"on the contrary, i laugh from the very bottom of my heart—or what
in me corresponds to that function in the human breast. i laugh at a
delicate joke, the flavour of which even you cannot appreciate."

"enjoy it whilst you may—at a future time must come the reckoning
day."

chapter ix

thus the two years of prosperity had ended in deeper gloom than that
in which they started. christmas had gone by in the usual festivities,
and rather strangely the whole family had met together on christmas
day—for the last time.

at the beginning of the new year, maggie and deborah had gone away to
stay with some friends at the other end of the town, and maggie had
gone two days previous to deborah, who was going in for an examination
on the second day. and deborah, whose love for her father seemed to
grow with each succeeding day, felt the short separation greatly.

"it's only for five days," she said to herself. "and he's coming to
bring us home on saturday, but how i wish he were coming too." for
lately he had looked very, very ill. his face had been grey and his
eyes curiously absent, and he had had a bad cough for many weeks, and
he said he suffered greatly from lumbago.

besides, he had not gone down to town so often lately—or if so not
till later in the afternoon—and there seemed very little money.

deborah, seeing this, prayed all the more earnestly the simple prayer.

"he's all right," she used to say at times. "it's only me, i'm
fidgety."

but on the day when she had to go away she felt as if she could
scarcely bear to part with him.

whilst she was busy making her preparations in the morning for going he
read the paper. but every now and again she ran down to speak to him,
just for the sake of saying something, but he seemed even more silent
than usual.

at last when she was ready he came up into the lobby to see her off.

she threw her arms round him and kissed him with all the passionate
love she had for him, and he kissed her, and said to her,—

"mind thou does well now. mind thou does well."

it was not very elegant, was it? but be that as it may, they were his
last words to her, so perhaps even the severest critics will let them
be. at the time she thought they referred to the examination she was
taking, but afterwards, long years afterwards, they came to have a
broader and a clearer light.

"you'll come early on saturday," she said. and the door closed.

she went off lightly into the town, feeling somewhat bright and happy.

he never came on saturday. on the friday he went away from home when
the others had gone out for the evening to some friends. he went away
all alone in the cold, shivering fog and took the night boat across the
raw, dark sea. the next that was heard of him was that he was drowned.
from the friday night until the wednesday night nothing was heard at
all.

it was jack who came to bring them home on saturday, and he came in the
morning instead of at night.

how miserable it was going home! let alone the biting wind, how cold
and cheerless it was in every room!

there was his hat and all his things, just where he always left them,
because he'd put on very, very old things to go away in—things he
hadn't worn for years. why, he'd taken that old grey coat that was so
frayed, and which he used to go to tend the bees in—and now it was
mid-winter, and the hum of the bees was silent, and the scented flowers
all dead. he had taken everything that was old and thin and worn,
and all night long he had stood on the deck and spoken now and then
to a sailor. it was terribly cold, one of the coldest nights of the
year—and he had such a dreadful cough.

two days afterwards they'd found him dead, or drowned—who can tell,
who knows? for none was there to smooth the bed of roses or to soothe
the last happy end.

the long heavy hours passed from saturday morning until wednesday
night. no news, nothing but the long, long wait and sickening hope that
had no brightness in it.

at last the desolating news was known. jack brought it home, and after
he had told those upstairs he came down into the little cellar kitchen
and told maggie and deborah. they could tell by his face as he came
in the door what had happened, but he just looked at deborah, perhaps
because she looked so terribly hard at him, and then he came in and sat
down and took her on his knee and turned his head away and said "it's
all over," and his voice seemed very husky.

that night when deborah went to bed the queer pain nearly stifled her.

never to be able to kiss him again; never to take his hand; never to
sit on his knee and sing "lead, kindly light," whilst he whistled,
nor any of the other hymns and glorious hunting songs which he had
taught her; never to sit on the chair beside him and work neat rows
of figures; never to play another game of chess, which she so loved
because he always let her win; never to play bézique again with him,
nor get his yellow slippers from the cupboard; never to put her hands
again into his pockets to find out what was there; never to hear
him speak, and never, never see him, was terrible. under ordinary
circumstances this great trouble would have made her pray more
earnestly for comfort unto god. but now as she knelt down to pray each
word seemed strangled in her throat and like to strangle her.

the only prayer that came was the one uttered for him—that prayer
which now was smashed to shivering atoms. for, truth to tell, deborah
had never prayed for anything else but him; he had been the one great
earthly link that joined her to god.

who can talk twaddle abstract to a child when its very existence is in
the concrete?

"i can't understand it. i can't understand it," she cried in horrid,
aching pain. "it seems as if something had really listened to my
prayer and answered it all the other way about—or—or god can't have
listened. they say at school that god is love—but oh! oh! i can't bear
to think of the pain he's forced father through, and then to have left
him in the end to drown in misery, and all alone."

she got up from her knees without a prayer.

"there's nothing to pray for," she said dully, and got into bed choking
with sobs.

the next day someone said it was a great mercy that it was known for
certain he was really dead, and that they ought to be very thankful
they were able to bring him back.

it was said by someone for a little comfort, even as we all try to
comfort each other at such sad times.

so when deborah went to bed she thought she'd try to frame a prayer on
that.

"please, god, thank you for letting us really know he's dead," she
said; but the next minute she was on her feet. it was no good, no good
at all.

the god almighty whom she had loved and praised and tried so hard to
please from her earliest years seemed to have developed into a harsh
and cruel tyrant.

"father was so good and kind and patient," she cried, "and he had to
put up with such a lot that no one ever knew of. oh, god, tell me why
you've done it, tell me why."

but god never answered, for god's ways are not man's ways, neither are
his thoughts our thoughts.

yet though all deborah's feelings revolted against god she dared not
own to it—not even in her deepest heart.

"i'm very wicked," she said earnestly. "it's all for my good that
father's gone."

then something within her rose burning hot and strong. "i don't care
if it is for my good. i hate the thought of it being for my good. why
should he have to suffer for my good? i'm not worth it. if that's the
case it makes it all the worse to bear. besides, it isn't for my good.
i feel all black and ugly and uncertain and half stunned."

they brought her father's body home and placed him in a better coffin,
and then he was taken away to the churchyard in the north, to lie under
the shadow of the great grand church, in the same grave with his wife.

it was terribly strange when they brought him back into the house.
maggie and deborah were in bed, and maggie was asleep.

"it's him," said deborah to herself, sitting up in bed to hear the thud
of feet.

how helpless, how terribly silent was the entrance now! and he never
came upstairs to kiss them nor to say how he'd fared whilst he had been
away.

no. and they didn't jump out of bed and look over the banister, nor
call to him. no, it was all different now.

yet last week at this time he'd been alive and moved about this very
house, contemplating in all seriousness and desperation his own
approaching death.

two days later they took him away again in the dark, cold morning.

"it isn't him," cried deborah, inwardly. "he could never die. i can't
live without him. he was everything to me. i don't believe he could
die. he was too great and good to ever die."

there came another piece of news.

the farmer had been the sole trustee for £700.

but when inquiries were made for it at the bank it was found that it
had gone.

there then lay the explanation of these two last seeming prosperous
years.

and all blamed him, for he was in the wrong, and the law is for
the punishment of wrongdoers, and no man has a right to take his
neighbour's goods.

deborah at the time scarcely felt or understood this latter shame.

the first blow had been so strong, so sure, that for the time it
paralysed every other feeling beside.

chapter x

it now seemed that a new and different life had begun—one in which the
sky was dark and cold and grey, and in which there was no beauty.

they had been very, very poor once before, but now they seemed even
poorer, and life seemed a misery and an uncertain drag.

there was still elinor and maggie and deborah at home besides marion,
and jack, who had come home to study for a civil service examination,
had not yet obtained an appointment, although he had passed.

he would probably have had to give it up but for the kindly help of a
nobleman, the son of a duke, whose tenant the farmer had been, and he
was thus enabled to obtain an appointment in the same town.

elinor went away from home to keep house for an uncle, she being about
this time nineteen.

then set in those days of poverty and greyness and lovelessness which
are so bitter to old and young hearts alike. but to deborah, for the
time, the feeling of utter emptiness and desolation deadened all others.

there was no one to come home for, no one to want to look nice for, no
one to watch for at the window, no one to work hard at lessons for, no
one, in fact, to do anything for.

they called it "home." perhaps in some ways it still was home, but
where is the real spirit of home when father and mother have both gone?

there was little of light or warmth in this home now. it had dwindled
down to four, two being children and two grown up.

and so things went on, without much love anywhere, chill and
comfortless.

besides the desolation caused by the sudden cutting of loved
companionship there hung round the house the feeling which always
follows on a tragedy.

it appeared as if in every room there hovered a silent, fleeting cloud
of pain—none the less felt because it was not seen.

on the stairs, in the hall, in the sitting-rooms, in the shabby little
bedroom, and in the kitchen one felt as if the dead face were still
looking out, hopelessly, miserably, silently, and many a time, when
deborah passed through, the sharp aching pain she was getting to
understand so well would rise full in her heart to think of him.

her mind constantly dwelt on him; it was impossible to forget.

nightly she dreamt about him, and it was always that he had come back
again.

each night for months the same dream would come, each time with some
little change to give it more reality, and each morning she awoke to
find it but a dream.

each night and morning tears filled the place of prayers, since father
was gone, and along with him everything worth living for, and the
remembrance of his misery remained alone.

these terrible dreams went on for months—horrible, hateful things,
like some refined torture, holding the brightness of hope for one
minute only to supplant it the next by the blackness of despair.

deborah always believed that he had really come, as sometimes he would
take her hand and smile and say, "i have really come this time, it
is now no dream at all," and she would awake happy, only to get up
miserable.

at last there came another quite different dream, one whose beauty and
reality was like cool, healing balm to hot suffering.

she had been walking in a straggling village street, filled with small
houses and everyday people. there had been no aim about this walk; she
remembered stopping to talk to some persons by the way and looking in a
little sweet-shop window at some large pink sweets marked four-a-penny.

in the midst of all this triviality there had come a dreamy, far-off
voice which said, "follow me on to the end—follow me to the end."
thereupon, looking onwards, she saw at the end of the street a narrow
gateway.

"i expect that's the end," she said idly, and walked on slowly, not
thinking much about it. but when she came to the gate it led into a
silent wood, and somehow the silence spoke so loudly that she was
constrained to go in.

a path led onward—a narrow, ragged path shaded with heavy trees.

onward she went, on, on, and ever as she went the path grew wilder,
lonelier, and the great branching avenues and trees more grand.

it was a hard and weary road to tread, and at last her feet began to
grow very tired from the rough stones and the long way she had come.

"why am i going on?" she said. "the voice was so far away that i
scarcely heard it; perhaps it was only a dream. besides, whom am i
following?" she walked on again. "i expect it's father," she said at
last. "he's the only thing worth following. if i could find him i
should be happy."

as this grew into a conviction she gained hope and courage and pressed
onward. but still the great gnarled forest grew in silence and in
grandeur, and ever the path grew harder to tread.

it seemed then as if she grew so very tired that one foot would
scarcely move before the other, but still she went along, till at last
in extreme weariness and pain she fell down under a large tree among a
great heap of dying leaves.

then through one of the big black avenues of trees had come the figure
from the picture, the man on whom she had looked with such curious
interest when the print was first hung.

it seemed as if from that point a good many roads branched off, all
dark and rutted and gloomy.

he glanced down some of the paths and bent his brows as if to try to
pierce the darkness, and presently his eyes lighted on deborah lying
there.

now deborah was very pleased to find this man. by some curious process
which she did not understand he had long ago left the picture and
passed, a real and substantial figure, into that other world of hers,
so that in the midst of all this loneliness she quite felt she had
found a friend.

instead of that he only looked at her very thoughtfully and coldly,
and with a rather unfriendly surprise, and turned away.

it was a very great blow to her, as naturally she could not realise
that although she had always been looking at him he never before had
looked at her.

just as he was turning away he turned back again.

"will you keep your father waiting?" he asked. but he said it as if it
were an afterthought, and rather uncertainly.

after that he disappeared, but where she could not tell.

so there was nothing to do but to get up again and go on alone.

presently the road seemed to grow worse still, and it seemed as if it
would never end.

"why am i coming?" she kept saying to herself. "no one told me i was
coming for anything, and i'm beginning to think father can't be here at
all."

and then in the darkest, weariest part the road bent suddenly to the
right and there was father!

she was so pleased to see him that for the time she thought of nothing
else.

but after a while she looked around, and there on one side she saw the
forest, and behind him on the other a glorious, pure white light was
streaming. what it was, or what its shape, she could not tell, but it
was something like a cross, and then an altar.

and this meeting was full of happiness which had in it no pain.

why, even as she stayed there he left her and went away to walk in the
glorious garden beyond the light, but she scarcely felt the parting,
and laughed and said, "why, i've let father go;" and he answered, "no,
i'm here. i walk here, whilst you walk in the shade."

and she woke from her dream comforted and happier and lighter than she
had ever been for months. but afterwards she thought about it very much.

"i wonder what that light was. i really wonder what it was. as soon as
it shone on me i felt happy. i'll go back into the forest again and
find out."

but she never went, neither did she dream of him again in any form.

"i want to go back again, i want to go," she cried. "i want to find him
and talk with him again, for i felt no pain when i awoke."

chapter xi

then as the months passed by everything settled down into a more or
less level state.

but in deborah's life two great gaps had been made—one the place left
empty by her father, the other the place left empty by god.

both had completely disappeared together, and she had no more power to
recall the one than the other.

not that any difference showed itself on the outside. she was still the
same quiet, unobtrusive, uninteresting child, with the same bundle of
infirmities and the same nervous dread of people and of things, which
latter infirmity, however, only appeared now and then.

"it's no good," she would say at times after trying hard to pray.
"i can't do it. i haven't the same interest in praying for myself.
besides, where's the use?"

but giving up religion was a hard thing to deborah. it left life so
grey and lifeless.

there were no more beautiful dreams about the angels, and no more trust
in god's love and mercy—and without these religion was a blank.

gradually, however, every bit of her spare time became filled by the
people from that other world.

it was not left till night to visit them—she was with them nearly all
the day.

at prayer time especially they called all attention to themselves and
by degrees she forgot to feel the sharp stinging pain whenever she
knelt down beside the bed.

"we are acting the part of god in turn," observed genius to plucritus.

"perhaps so," said he. "but this is a species of idolatry."

"at any rate i am not playing the part of a deceiver. i am what i
appear to be."

"not you. half your time you spend in masquerading as the man in yon
picture."

"well, and don't i tell you that he is my brother— my twin brother?"

"all the more reason why you should steer clear of him. i've no faith
in the love of twins. remember esau and jacob."

"a pure relationship of the flesh, by which a man sold that which
didn't belong to him for a dish of red pottage."

hereat plucritus laughed and changed the conversation.

"have you noticed how silent virginius has been since the farmer's
death?" he questioned.

"yes."

"he is fretting, i believe— suffering from a kind of distemper."

"indeed?"

"yes. i should say he was labouring under an acute attack of the sulks,
brought on simply because i'm a good hand at making prayers."

"ah!"

"he has not forgiven me yet for those half-dozen sentences i taught
deborah. i expect he would like to have been the instigator of them
himself."

"he would have worded them differently, or at any rate under the
circumstances, and knowing the facts, he would have omitted them
altogether."

"virginius is a bungler," said plucritus.

"how can a spirit who never attempts anything ever bungle?" asked
genius impatiently.

"does he never attempt anything?" and plucritus laughed in a harsh,
disagreeable way.

"never that i can see. his only work seems to be to stand there
immovable and receive insults."

"now and again he will lay his hand lovingly on the heads of little
children," said plucritus, mockingly.

"only to be pushed off again."

"that may be. but as you seem down on him i must stand up for him,
since above all things i love fair play. now i'll tell you a very
pretty story, and one which the children would say was ever so funny.
listen. you know that every night when deborah is asleep you fly off
to your own land, and are, i should say, mightily glad to get there.
but i am not so fortunate—at least of late months i have preferred to
stay. so each night, being left alone, i have prepared a very pretty
dream—very realistic, very simple, just the kind of thing a child
would appreciate. having played the part of god to such perfection
i now took to playing the part of the farmer. i had learnt all his
expressions both of word and feature, and could act up to his part to
perfection. naturally deborah was taken in. she would put her arms
round me and kiss me in the most affectionate way possible. meeting
with thus much encouragement i was far too kind-hearted to give it up.
i made many excuses for my long absence, and even went so far once as
to explain that that had not been me in the coffin at all, but someone
else. _that_, as you know, was quite the truth. but though, truth
to tell, i got a bit sick of it, i always had my reward in the morning.
she would awake with a face as round as the moon, to be changed in less
than five minutes to one as long, or longer than the proverbial fiddle.
now virginius, who is always staring and gaping and never for two
seconds shuts his eyes, saw all this, and he raised his saintly voice
to interpose. he said it wasn't written down in the book, but i was
able to prove to him that it was. well, after that he bided his time,
and one night just lately he descended to concoct a dream himself.
naturally i was curious to see what it would be. it was a most artistic
one. he didn't do it all himself; he got one of the spirits up there to
paint the scenery for him.

"it began in a village street and led from there into a forest. you
know the kind of place—a rather different kind from what one meets
in this world; a bit better done, perhaps. well, virginius had really
been most ingenious. i could not for the life of me understand why a
mere child should be shown such a scene as this, so i kept myself on
the alert to help if need be in case of emergency. moreover, i resented
this intrusion. the forest was mine, the path mine, and i marvelled
at his audacity in daring to portray them. now deborah got very tired
of that walk, for it was longer than she reckoned or than she knew;
moreover, it was a trial of faith, as she wasn't quite sure what she
was going after. but she went on for a long time fairly well. at last
she fell down" (here he laughed). "they all fall down, you know, and
then what was my surprise to see approaching from an opposite path that
gentleman," and he pointed to the picture. "you may be sure at this
point i was fully awake. ‘now then, virginius,' said i, in my most even
voice, ‘we've had quite enough of your foolery. this forest belongs to
me.'

"now i believe virginius's idea had been that this man should help
deborah out of the forest, or that they should help each other out.
but that did not suit my way of thinking. virginius was doing his best
to make the man say something, so he paid no attention to me, but i
knew he had odds against him. the gentleman refused to hear the weak
voice, since by this time i had interposed, and all virginius's good
intentions fell through."

here genius, who had been greatly interested throughout, interrupted
him.

"and do you mean to say he went away without saying a word?"

"who? virginius?"

"why, no. the human being."

"well, no. in this world we are never distinctly brutal to each other
till we cannot avoid it, and politeness oils the wheels of life. so
when he had turned away he turned back again. ‘will you keep your
father waiting?' said he.

"‘what's the good of letting the cat out of the bag?' said i; so he
took my advice and went on alone, which was just as i wanted. but
deborah, who didn't need much telling when she was going in quest of
her father, got up, and that was rather different from what i wanted."

"and what happened to them?"

"well, i can hardly tell. i believe she saw a will-o'-the-wisp shining
in the forest and took it for something else." he looked intently at
genius and laughed. then he continued,—

"as for the man, well, i would not presume to say."

"and that is the end of the dream?"

"exactly and truthfully."

"the will-o'-the-wisp?"

"certainly."

"then there was another fall?"

"well, yes, i expect so. she muddled and draggled through the black
mire till she didn't know whether she was standing or falling."

"and that is the end of the dream?"

"how many more times do you want telling? did ever anybody ever see
anything else in the silent forest besides will-o'-the-wisps?"

"why yes, at times i have heard of the pure light."

"oh, god!" said plucritus, and he laughed. "oh, god!"

chapter xii

the years glided by fairly smoothly so far as outward events were
concerned.

maggie won a scholarship which enabled her to take a three years'
course at a better school—and deborah afterwards won the same.

maggie became a pupil-teacher in the school where they had gone
when they first came to the town, and afterwards deborah became a
pupil-teacher there too.

deborah did not like teaching; it had only been in father's lifetime
that it had appeared to her the least bit nice. you see she had a great
many infirmities, some easily discernible, some less so.

but there was nothing else that she could be, so the inevitable had to
be accepted.

not that she was distinctly unhappy at teaching, far from it.

"if there is one class of people i despise it's the people who grumble
at the work they have to do," she used to say. "pride alone should keep
them from it."

so whenever anyone asked her how she liked teaching she always said,
"very much indeed;" but if they still asked if there was anything she
would like to be better than a teacher she always told the truth and
said, "yes—a nurse."

she had quite made up her mind that when she had passed all the
examinations necessary for teaching, and was old enough, she would go
into training for a hospital nurse, because she loved to look after
sick people.

sometimes some people, just for the sake of talking, probably, would
press the question further and ask if she would like nursing best of
anything, and then she would look at them and laugh, and say, "yes,
best of anything;" but they didn't understand the look, and they didn't
understand the laugh, and so they let the matter be.

deborah at school had indeed always been reckoned a dreamer, and one
teacher had made her life a species of mild misery by perpetually and
unceasingly calling her by that name.

did she raise her pencil one minute from her work there would come
across the class that everlasting voice,—

"now, deborah, there you are again! dreaming as usual. dear me! what a
wonderful brain yours must be!"

and the other girls would laugh; but because she had never been able to
form a single friendship she could never join in.

when she became a teacher she used often to ponder on these words.

"well, anyway, i can't be so bad," she used to think. "because if any
of these children talk or play or are lazy i know it at once, and if i
never did anything else but dream i should never know it at all."

there was a deal of hard work to be done in those days too.

it was in the days when pupil-teachers taught all day and learnt
all night, and went early to school in the morning for an hour's
instruction.

it was about this time that jack and deborah became very great friends.
the friendship, on her side at least, grew out of gratitude.

there had come to the town some short while before a very great actor,
whom for her own reasons she badly wanted to see.

deborah rarely if ever went to theatres, and was not sorry to miss the
treat, as they did not appeal to her.

"i never forget that it's only acting, and at the most serious parts i
always feel inclined to laugh," she remarked.

that was probably because her experience had been somewhat narrowly
limited to a few pantomimes and still fewer plays.

the pantomimes, with the exception of one, had been intensely coarse
and tawdry. that one indeed, "the forty thieves," had been all that
beauty and taste and brightness could make it, but it had not been
brought out on the same scale afterwards because it had not paid.

the thing that seemed to take was an intensely vulgar woman with an
intensely vulgar face, dressed in an intensely vulgar costume, singing
an intensely vulgar song to an —— —— audience.

at the finish of each verse loud laughter and applause greeted her,
which naturally only aggravated her intensities, and every time she
appeared it was the occasion for a fresh outburst of feeling.

whether the audience were laughing at the woman or at her song it would
be hard to say; probably they knew best themselves. that was some
years ago. things have no doubt improved since then.

however that may be, the theatre had never held any great interest for
deborah beyond this one man. but he probably made up for whatever lack
she might have, since she would rather have gone to see him than any
sovereign or statesman ever born.

so it was a wonderful piece of good fortune when jack promised to take
her to see him.

it was a terribly stormy night on which they went, and the wind and
rain came in great gusts and showers.

when they came home deborah looked at the picture on the wall, and it
seemed even more lifelike than it had ever been before.

"i never knew before i had any respect for theatres," she thought.
"what a difference one man can make! what a very great difference!"

some time after, maggie went away to college and the family dwindled
down to three.

chapter xiii

whatever were deborah's qualifications beauty and attractiveness were
not among the foremost. from the age of fifteen to twenty she was
tormented unceasingly with sties upon her eyes. now, you will probably
be so disgusted when you read this that you will close the book. but
there is a little originality somewhere about it, if you care to think,
because the heroines of books are not often afflicted that way. these
sties, moreover, were by no means of the insignificant kind. they
were like big gatherings that disfigured and discoloured whichever
side of her face they arose upon. no sooner was one gone than another
came, and frequently two would appear together—on the top and bottom
lid—closing her eye completely. once or twice indeed she would have
two on the one eye and another on the other, which was the height of
discomfort. for besides being very unsightly they were exceedingly
painful, and would sometimes throb till she was nearly beside herself.
sometimes, when they hurt more than usual, she would cry from sheer low
spirits; but that only aggravated them the more, and made her look so
ugly that everybody laughed and then pitied her.

"i don't see why i should be afflicted like this," she used to say,
looking in the glass. "they come week after week and i'm never rid of
them. besides, i hate teaching with my eyes in this state. i hate to be
seen with these red, ugly, swollen lids."

"it is to teach you patience and sympathy," said a voice.

"fiddlesticks!" said deborah. "how is it i need so much more teaching
than anybody else round about? and i'm sure the other week, when i had
three sties on my eyes and a gathering on my finger, and a headache
which lasted four successive days without a break, i hadn't spirit
enough left to be anything but patient; so where is the virtue in it?"

naturally there was no reply to this.

one day someone observed, "what a pity your eyes have been so spoilt.
you used to have such nice lashes and now they've nearly all come off."
but there was absolutely no comfort in that, so she might just as well
have left it unsaid.

now the time was drawing on for deborah to go to college to be trained
as a teacher; in another four months or so the old life in the old
school would be over.

"how desperately dull life is," thought she. "why doesn't something
happen?" and something did happen—she fell in love.

it happened like this.

there came as an assistant master to the school a young man who was
very nice.

deborah was, as a rule, rather hard to please, but saw took a distinct
fancy to him the first time she saw him. he was tall and he was
well-built, with a refined and pleasant face.

"i wonder who he is?" she said.

"oh! don't you know? it's the new assistant in the boys' school,"
replied a girl who was with her.

"oh! how lovely!" and a new interest had come into her life.

and deborah, weakly, sickly, diminutive and full of infirmities, drew
near to this unknown light.

she got an introduction and felt happy; he seemed just as nice to speak
to as he was to look at—and that isn't often the case, you know.

"i like him well enough to try to be nice to him," she said. "i hope
i don't have any more of these beastly sties for a month or two," and
quite forgot that she had any more infirmities—as who would not?

for a time all the shyness which had accompanied her from her youth
upward vanished literally as if by magic.

she would go down into the other school at every opportunity, just to
see the young man and speak to him.

it was the happiest and most natural part of her life.

"i wonder if i could make him love me too," she thought. and she used
to watch him in church or wherever else it might be, and keep saying,
"love me, love me, love me," and in some ways it was very great fun.
the greatest fun was to say, "love me, love me," when she was talking
to him, in a voice but he couldn't hear.

but there came a day when all this golden love cloud gathered into one
of purple.

deborah fell seriously in love with him, and all the fun and the
laughter died out of it.

still everyone went on laughing just the same as on that first day
when she ran into school and told them she had found an ideal man.

and because she had begun by laughing herself she was bound to keep it
up, and no one saw the difference.

one day she saw him talking to another girl, and it was the first time
she had ever seen him speaking to another woman. the girl was very
pretty, with blue eyes and brown curly hair, and she was little too,
but she was a pretty figure.

deborah became madly jealous.

"i hate her, i hate her, and i hate him too," she said. "what does she
want, meddling with him? he will come to like her best."

and then she went home and looked in the glass. yes, there was another
of those ugly disfigurements puffing up the whole of one cheek.

"why is she so pretty and i so plain?" she thought. "if i were as
pretty as she is i—i—i what? i nothing."

a prize distribution took place in the town some six weeks or so after.
now, though by this time it was the middle of summer, the wind and the
rain on that particular day were extreme, and so deborah found as she
took some dozen girls down to receive prizes. it was a long walk, and
by the time they got there none of them looked very presentable.

she never forgot that day, for had the fates conspired they could not
have made her appear more disreputable. her hair was dishevelled and
her fringe out of curl, and her hat, which had blown off in the journey
down, kept lurching constantly to one side.

but the first person she set eyes on when she came to the journey's
end was the young man. for the time being she forgot her appearance in
the delight of seeing him.

they sat together during the ceremony, and afterwards walked home
together, and still she forgot to think of her untidy state.

but when she was inside the house she went upstairs.

the first thing a young woman does, as a rule, when she has just seen
the young man she likes, is to look at herself in the glass. that is if
she is natural, but of course, as we all know, there are a great many
very unnatural women in the world. deborah, however, belonged to the
unnatural sort, evidently; she deliberately refrained from going near
the glass, though it was there waiting for her.

"i daren't look at myself, i look so hideous," she thought, and that
was just about the truth.

in a fortnight's time they broke up.

it was a very miserable fortnight. for one thing, jack was going to be
married at the end of it, and it meant the entire breaking up of the
only thing that had been home; and for another it meant the end of all
that short and golden dream.

when the last day came the pain round deborah's heart had reached such
a pitch that it seemed almost uncontrollable. along with it came the
sense of bitter disappointment; she had quite failed to make the least
impression. that was only natural; but it is so difficult to form a
just opinion of ourselves. when it came to saying "good-bye," she felt
so aching and miserable inside that she thought it would be best to
share the burden.

"i won't take the least notice of him when i say good-bye. he thinks i
can't live without him. conceit!"

so when it came to the last adieu she managed it better than she
managed most things.

usually when she shook hands with him she did manage to leave her hand
in his just the twentieth part of second, but to-day he was just the
twentieth part of a second too late to catch hold of her hand at all.
that pleased deborah, or at least it pleased something within her which
she was trying to identify with herself. and always before, no matter
what state her eyes had been in, she had always looked at him quite
straightforwardly; to-day, however, she didn't take the trouble to look
at him at all, and took no notice of him, but began talking to the
next young man; yet all the time it was all she could do to keep from
turning round and giving him the biggest scratch he'd ever had in his
life.

then he went away, and she was left all alone, to laugh and be as
foolish as usual.

but all the time, down in her heart of hearts, she kept saying, "why
wouldn't they let me kiss him? i wanted to—i wanted to."

and something else whispered, with mock sympathy, "well, never mind. a
man's conceit is equal to a woman's love any day. by saying ‘good-bye'
to him like that you hurt him just as much as you hurt yourself;" but
somehow or other it was very cold comfort—very.

next jack got married and the house became very dull. a few weeks later
deborah went to college.

chapter xiv

college was very distasteful. her one aim and object in life was to
live quietly and to be peaceably let alone; but there was never any
quietness here, and much less peace. privacy was almost a thing unknown.

for all that, the discipline and the life were in many ways excellent,
and the governesses worked so hard that they had a knack of making lazy
students ashamed of themselves.

there were never any slovenly-prepared lessons, and everything was
done with clock-like precision. the great fault was that the hours
of drudgery were too long, and the occasional sound of chimes would
greatly have improved the everlasting tic-tic.

the most comical part of the whole thing, perhaps, was the french
lesson. deborah used to sit and shake with laughing the whole time it
was in progress, it was so very funny.

but she had one thing to be thankful for whilst there. her eyes were
very troublesome for the first three months, and at last the attention
of the college doctor was called to them. he just simply said, "buy
an ounce of boracic acid and put it on them." so it was bought, and,
wonder of wonders! it acted almost like a miracle.

"i can't bear this doctor," many of the girls used to say.

"well, i shall always feel grateful to him," she would rejoin. "he
cured my eyes when i was beginning to think they were incurable."

that was probably the greatest benefit she derived from being there.

when the holidays came round she stayed a week in the town where she
had been brought up, and then went into the country for christmas.

whilst waiting in the station for the train she came across that same
young man who had caused her so many heartaches and burnings.

absence had not in any way altered deborah's affection for him, so
when she saw him there in the station she could just have danced for
joy. he had with him the other man to whom she had given such an
affectionate farewell four months since. he was very nice and quiet,
and kind-hearted in an unobtrusive way, and it isn't often one meets
that kind of a man.

it happened by chance that they were standing on the same platform
from which her train was going, and deborah was not feeling the least
bit shy that day, so she went to speak to them. however, the young
gentleman kept distinctly aloof; he even made as if he were going to
walk away, but he didn't.

"i think you knew mr —— a little," said the other.

"oh, yes, i knew him very well," she answered. but when she went to him
and held out her hand he didn't make the slightest effort to take it,
except in a very cold and uncertain way.

"i don't seem to remember you in the very least," he said, and looked
at her just as if she had been a perfect stranger to whom he had never
before spoken.

"but i remember you perfectly," said deborah, and laughed, for she was
much too happy to think of anything but speaking the truth.

they went together to the railway carriage, where maggie was already
settled, and he stood there till the train went out.

just before it went he said to deborah: "i don't know how i could have
forgotten you, you are just the same as you used to be." but she knew
she had never been anything very grand, so she only laughed and looked
at him. truth to tell she could scarcely look at anyone else.

when it came to the last sad minute she was bound to look away.

"if i did dare to look at him then, he would understand too well," she
thought, and so once more it was a most unsatisfactory farewell. when
they had settled down, and the train was on its way, she hid herself
behind a paper.

"he had forgotten all about me, and it's scarcely four months ago. i
expect all the times i used to run down to see him he was thinking of
someone else." she felt a bit broken-hearted; she remembered all the
silly little subterfuges she had been up to, and how she had once worn
aprons for a fortnight because she thought it looked domesticated and
as if she understood something about the management of a house.

"i don't know what you can see in mr ——," said maggie, from the
opposite seat. "he is so shy."

but deborah did not argue—it was not worth it.

after the christmas holidays she went back to college and the two years
dragged away.

deborah, when she first went to college, was forever being scolded
about her essays.

"it's no good your ever thinking you can write," a hard, contemptuous
voice was continually saying to her. "you had two or three rather
signal failures in that line before coming to college at all, and even
in this mediocre place you fail to make the least impression with your
work."

on the other hand, a clear, firm voice kept ringing, "some day, when i
care to write in my own way, they shall listen to me." it was a very
proud voice—too proud, perhaps.

there was a girl who was noted for being the best essay-writer in the
college. she was a little older than most of those who were there, and
was supposed to have a better conception of life and things as they
really are. but she was not a great favourite, as she rather looked
down on most of the other girls, and understood the art of being rude a
little better than most people. her name was jane shaw.

towards the end of the first year deborah's essays were said to be
improving, and by the end she had managed to make as many marks as
jane. not that she ever counted marks; she laughed at and despised
them, which was another piece of pride.

the subjects for essays in the second year were, however, more to
deborah's taste; they were not quite so cramped, and gave one a better
range for expression. she began to pass jane by, not intentionally but
unavoidably, for it was easier on the whole to write well than badly.

toward the end of the second year the senior students prepared for an
oratorio, which they were going to sing in st paul's on ascension day,
as it was the year of the late queen's diamond jubilee.

one day one of the students who had come from the same school as
deborah came running up to her.

"i say, there's going to be a general practice, and we're going to ——
college. we'll be sure to see mr ——. he's there, you know."

but she didn't relish this piece of news; she would very much rather
not have gone. she had known all along that he had come back to london
as a master in the college which he had left two years ago; he was
clever.

so the night for the practice came and went.

when they got back again this girl, whose name was minnie, came flying
up to her.

"i say, did mr —— speak to you?"

"no."

"but you saw him?"

"yes."

"and he never spoke to you?"

"i never looked at him."

"you couldn't help it. you sat just at the other side of the table."

"i never looked at him. did he speak to you?"

"oh, yes. he was quite nice. much nicer than he used to be. i thought
he would have forgotten me. i never spoke to him half as much as you
did. how strange that he should have forgotten you."

"i—yes."

"what's that?" said another girl who had just come in.

"oh! we're only talking about someone deborah used to run after."

"what about him?" said the other, and she laughed very loudly.

"well, it's like this," deborah replied. "two years ago i fell
desperately in love with a young man, but it was one-sided. naturally,
the next time i met him he didn't know me."

"but the strange part about it is that he should remember me,"
persisted minnie.

"well, you see," laughed deborah, "i expect all the time i was in love
with him he was in love with you," and she walked away.

but that night, when the silence bell rang, she hid her face in the
solitary pillow.

"i'd have forgiven him if he'd forgotten her too; but to remember her
after two years, and to forget me after four months, it's too bad—it's
too bad," and she lay awake for a long time, too miserable to cry, too
restless to sleep.

"besides, he never knew her except the little bit i told him about her,
and that never interested him. he tells lies—so now!"

however, it's no use dwelling on these things; but providence was kind
enough to let her see him once more, in just about as tantalising a way.

and something had said, "go and speak to him;" and something else had
said, "come away."

and she went away, feeling more like a wild cat than a woman.

"if—if—" she gasped.

"life is made up of ifs," laughed a voice in her ear, and it was all
over.

the older deborah grew, the more unhappy she grew inwardly. not that
anybody knew—for in college they never took her to be anything
seriously but sleepy.

for one thing, as she grew older, she was beginning to feel more and
more the want of some religion. many and many a time she would get out
of bed in the middle of the night and kneel down and try to pray. but
on every occasion a feeling of intensest blackness would surround her,
and she was bound to give it up.

"it's all very well the clergy telling us to pray," she would say,
getting back into bed. "but i can't. every time i would do it something
stops me. i've lost god, and where he's gone to i can't tell. and i
suppose everybody would blame me and say how wicked i was, but it's
because they don't understand. if i could believe in god and pray
to him as i did when i was a little girl i'd be a deal happier and
stronger than i am."

and so it came to the last few weeks of college life—the time for the
awarding of prizes for the year.

probably all those who have attended schools have experienced that
general dissatisfaction which customarily attends the distribution of
prizes.

"it's all done by favouritism," the girls used to assert. "the way the
prizes are given here is a disgrace."

and one or two rather flagrant examples were given by way of specifying.

"yes," said deborah, who understood things just as well as most people.
"i can't understand what pleasure there is in receiving prizes under
such circumstances."

"but you'll get one yourself," remarked one of the girls. "you're bound
to get the composition prize."

"well that would only be fair," cried another girl, and for a wonder
all the others chimed in "yes."

"don't be too sure," observed another, and she nodded her head wisely.
"i've been watching jane shaw lately."

"but deborah's essays are splendid. jane's are only very good," urged a
would-be champion.

"don't be too sure," retorted the same wiseacre, and she went to bed.

the next day jane came to deborah.

"you will get the composition prize," she said somewhat ungraciously.

"i don't think so," rejoined deborah, but she knew she was not speaking
the truth.

"yes, you will," she answered sharply. "i have kept count of our marks
for the year."

"you don't mean to say you've kept count for a year," said deborah, in
wonderment.

"of course i have," she replied with a little toss of her head. "i
always like to know exactly where i stand."

after a pause she continued: "of course i have stood no chance from the
very first. i lost twenty marks right out once because the principal
differed from some remarks of mine."

"indeed."

"of course, and i do not consider it fair that i should have lost them.
you, and such as you, write simply according to the college rule."

deborah was silent. probably jane did not know how rude she was, and
with her parting hit she went away.

then that pride, the only strong and lasting pride in deborah's
composition, asserted itself.

"why should i enter into the competition with such as jane?" she
thought. "she may have the prize with pleasure. so long as i know i am
really first i don't care about the marks or the prize one bit."

another girl came running up to her.

"i say, i've just been adding up the composition marks and you are
first."

deborah began to think seriously.

she did not want the prize and jane did, and the last fortnight's
unceasing talk about prizes had sickened her.

"i'll go to miss c—— to-night after lessons and tell her i'd rather
not have it, as i don't care for prizes."

having decided in her mind she began to screw her courage up to the
right pitch.

but jane came to her and began again lamenting her loss of the prize.

"well," said deborah, for somehow or other she felt sorry for her, "you
need not bother. i will not take the prize in any case—i don't quite
believe in them."

"do you mean to say if they offered it to you, you would not take it?"

"yes."

jane went away.

later in the evening she entered the room and went straight to deborah.

"_i_ am first on the list, _you_ are only second," she cried,
and walked off without waiting for any reply.

that night when deborah went upstairs the dormitory was empty. she
turned the light up and drew her curtain and prepared for bed.
suddenly there was a great rush of feet down the stone stairs and
deborah's curtain was swirled back with a rattle.

"do you know who's got the composition prize?" exclaimed half a dozen
voices.

"jane."

"who told you?"

"she did."

"it's like her impudence," remarked one young lady.

"it's shameful," observed another. "she never wrote half so well as you
did."

"no, i know," said deborah, and she looked round at the girl who spoke,
and laughed.

"are you going to make a fuss about it?" asked another.

"oh, no. i ought to be thankful to her. she has really spared me the
unpleasant position of posing. in any case i would not have taken the
prize."

no amount of sympathising or expostulating could draw another word out
of her, so at last they went away. but all that night, till the silence
bell rang, other girls came running in with the same cry.

long after silence and darkness reigned deborah sat on the side of the
bed, and a fight which was bitter and hot was raging inside her.

"you are too conceited," urged an even voice in her ear. "you imagine
you write much better than you do. it is no good thinking you are
unjustly treated; the prizes here are given as fairly as possible, and
it is only the disappointed students who raise the hue-and-cry."

"i know," said deborah, and sat silent.

"besides, you have no gift that way," the voice went on. "and it's
time you learnt it. you've had five more rejections within the last
eighteen months—not to speak of those before entering college, and it
ought to have taught you to understand your proper place better."

"i know."

"you have no talent except what is very mediocre. you are worthy only
of a second prize, and not perhaps of that."

the sense of injustice came burning hot and strong, and she clenched
her two hands in profitless anger.

"then why, if i have no talent, have they always said my essays are
different from all the rest? why have those governesses, who have
nothing to do with the subject, congratulated me on them? why have they
always been read, and why—"

"oh, now we are coming to quite a new phase," replied the voice.
"formerly you looked down on college opinion, now you are laying store
by it."

"well," said deborah, dejectedly, "it was the only bit of encouragement
i ever got."

"you don't need encouraging, and perhaps one of these days, when you
get properly discouraged, you'll take to teaching seriously and give up
writing, for you're no good at anything else."

deborah got into bed.

the next day brought the news that she had not even obtained the second
prize, it had been won by another girl.

"never mind," whispered an easy voice in her ear. "they put you out of
the race altogether—it was wisest."

"but you are quite sure i was the best?"

"oh, perfectly." and then there came that easy laugh which made
deborah almost laugh too, but not quite; the loss of the first place
had been more to her than most people may imagine.

during the last year that deborah was in college her second brother,
who had for some years been a great anxiety, died suddenly of pneumonia
after a three days' illness. what debts he had contracted, and after
all, considering his life, they were wonderfully few, were paid by the
sisters.

about this time also they were able to pay back the money which had
been wrongly taken by their father.

chapter xv

when deborah left college she took a school in the country.

"now, you are quite sure you know your own mind," the principal
observed, for he had not expected this application.

"yes, quite sure," and he was only too pleased to get it filled up.

a country school to the uninitiated may probably appear a haven of
rest and peacefulness. but under certain circumstances, and in certain
places, it may be the exact opposite of this. the one to which deborah
had gone was a most charming one, and on the outside it looked all that
was successful.

"you have come here to learn, and you must bear it and put up with it,"
said a voice, but at times the misery and meanness and littleness of
the surroundings choked the voice altogether.

the feminine portion of the aristocracy in that place were of that
section which believes implicitly in the art of snubs and condescension.

such women are pretty numerous in the world—if they were not so the
world would be a vastly different place.

at first the manifold bows and smiles and nods amused her, but at last
they palled, as all things do in time.

"if they only knew how ridiculous and insincere it makes them look
they would not do it," she thought. "the only one among them for whom
i have any respect or affection is the clergyman's wife—and that is
because she treats me sensibly as a working woman and does not try to
overpower me with her excessively charming manner."

this village was a very good school in which to learn, and it taught
deborah more than any town school would have.

not that she had any belief in anything. far from it. why she so often
thought of christ and his doctrine she could not tell.

"i don't believe in him, and i never get any good from praying to him.
if he is all love and all-powerful, why doesn't he give me back my old
faith?"

but every time she knelt down to pray the old feeling of suffocation
and blackness returned.

at last she began to think of christ as a man.

"if i forget that he is a god i shall catch hold of him better."

and no sooner had she done this than she was struck by the extreme
marvellous beauty of his character. "i'll cling on to christ, though i
don't understand him very well," she thought.

but if you follow christ he will lead you by the most terrible uphill
undiscovered paths that ever you trod in your life, and if you try to
follow him blindly, without any clear guiding light showing the way
upward, you are of all creatures on earth most miserable.

so because she thought that christ would have approved she would often
light the school fire and sweep up the hearth. there were more people,
doubtless, who approved of this besides christ, the woman who cleaned
the school being prominent among the number.

the clergyman in the parish was very fond of deborah. it was only
natural, because she managed the school very well and kept the children
in order. he was a very interesting study, though he was old, and at
times he could be very charming.

there was, however, one gentleman there whom deborah much liked. he was
the father of a boy whom she went to teach every night. he was always
kind to her, and always polite whenever she might meet him, and never
condescending. and she was very thankful.

"if it were not for this gentleman," she used to think at times, "i
should get to fancying there was something wrong with me, i get so many
snubs which seem to me uncalled for." so she felt a certain respect
for him: unobtrusive kindness always excited that feeling in her, as
perhaps it does in most of us.

at last the snubs ceased to have any effect; when one is subjected to a
great deal of that kind of thing it generally happens that way.

for some months before she left the people had become nonentities to
her; she was taken up with things which were far more a case of life
and death to her than they could ever be.

chapter xvi

as soon as deborah came out of college she made fresh literary
attempts; she was not successful. now, frequent and continuous failures
are depressing, but they usually have the good effect of weeding out
the unfit and leaving only the strong. however, she was beginning to
feel dispirited. she had tried tragedy, comedy, mixtures, satires,
ghost stories, and myths, and everything had failed and been returned.
each rejection had come like a dull thump on the top of her heart, but
none perhaps for some years had had quite the same dispiriting effect
as the first. still she had hoped that when once out of college, and
with more time to give to writing, she would manage better; but that
was not so, the failures still continued. when she had been in the
country about a year she went to london for a week's holiday.

susan was there and they had a very enjoyable time.

"do you know, i have a most irresistible longing to have my fortune
told," deborah said one day during this holiday. "it has been growing
on me for some time."

"i thought you didn't believe in that kind of thing," remarked susan.

"no, i don't. but i want to try to find out something. will you come?"

"oh, yes," susan answered; she rather liked the idea.

there was a nurse staying in the same house who believed implicitly
in such things, and she furnished them with the name and address of
a woman who, according to her accounts, had much fame as a truthful
fortune-teller.

it was a hot friday afternoon when they went, and the next day deborah
was returning to the country.

the woman had a fine face and a pleasing manner.

she first of all told susan's hand—and she really did contrive to tell
it marvellously well. she told her a great deal too, and all that she
said was true. by this time it was getting very dark, and there was
every appearance of a thunder-storm—the heat all day had been intense.

when she came to read deborah's hand she had exhausted her supply of
words. but after a while she said,—

"you are unfair in your prejudices. you take strong likes and dislikes
without any good foundation for them."

"there now," said susan. "that is you to a ‘t,' deborah."

after that the lady was some time casting about in her mind as to what
she should say next, till suddenly susan queried,—

"has she any particular gift for writing?"

that rather startled deborah; she had not expected it, although it was
the one thing and the only thing she wanted to know.

the fortune-teller looked very minutely at both hands and then declared
very decidedly,—

"no. there is not the slightest indication of any gift that way—not in
the slightest."

there was a short silence, during which deborah had the most curious
feeling of baffled anger she had ever felt in her life.

"i told you so," said a voice in her ear far plainer than any human
voice. "how many times do you want telling? you may be quite sure if
this woman saw the least signs of anything that way she would tell you
at once."

by this time the fortune-teller had begun to speak again.

"you have a gift though, and that is for acting. you should go on the
stage. you would make an excellent actress."

deborah laughed, and she might be excused the rudeness of it: a more
unlikely person for an actress was never born.

it was she who had always been told to sit down in college when she got
up to recite, and who had invariably been placed in the lowest class
for reading. moreover, she was short and insignificant in appearance,
and by no means understood the art of dressing to advantage. besides,
another word for being an actress, in deborah's mind, was being "fast,"
and she knew she was very far from being that. again, she was not fond
of actresses nor acting, though that was probably due to ignorance.
there were only three of the few she had seen whom she had ever really
liked, and those were ellen terry, winifred emery, and annie hughes.
yes, and one other—amy roselle; but she was dead.

ellen terry had entranced her. she had only seen her once, but that
once to her had been a perfect dream. she watched her almost with the
absorbed interest she gave to the people in her other world, and when
the play was over had felt an intense longing to go and put her arms
round her neck and kiss her.

to return to the fortune-teller.

after she had delivered the last shot, as it were, she had no more to
say, and they took their leave.

deborah was so angry and so disappointed that she could scarcely eat
any tea, but was actress enough not to show it; so perhaps there was an
ironical truth in the lady's statements after all.

"fancy her telling you you could act," said susan.

"oh, yes, they always tell you something like that, or they think your
vanity will be wounded," deborah replied, and hoped the thunder-storm
would pass off before they went into the street again.

they visited the theatre that night, and the fortune-teller passed
completely out of deborah's mind, not to return for nearly two years.

as she sat in the theatre and watched a great actor she began thinking
of the curious interest she had always taken in him ever since the
hanging of the little picture, long before she knew there was such a
man in reality at all.

"i wonder if, supposing i tried very hard with my writing, i might some
day just be allowed to shake hands with him," she thought. "i'd rather
be spoken to by him than any other celebrity in the whole world." she
sighed.

"i'd never be able to make a great enough name. i try hard enough now,
and it never has the least effect."

when she went home she wrote another story, and pocketed all her pride
and sent it to a very inferior novelette series. but they returned it.

deborah then made up her mind.

"i will write nothing more till i am thirty," she thought. "i've spent
all my life so far in nothing but rejections, and after a certain point
i don't think they're good for people. besides, it's waste of time."

the truth was that she had been thoroughly disheartened and did not
like to own up to it.

so she began to study for matriculation, but she was not fond of
this kind of study, and it took all her strength of mind to keep it
up. perseverance, however, will do much, and when she had worked
successfully through a book on mechanics she felt almost as if she had
worked successfully through the examination itself.

still, as time went on she began to grow low-spirited. never in all her
life before had she stuck persistently to books. never had she let more
than four months at most pass without writing some story or other; it
had seemed a part and a necessity of her life.

now month followed month, and one year lengthened almost into two, and
still she stuck to the lesson books.

low spirits were natural to her, but this was a place which would never
dispel them. the unkindnesses, the unpleasant quarrels weighed on her
just as much as her failures, and no amount of not-caring could ever
take the sting away.

besides, there were other troubles, flimsy skeletons in the cupboard
that one never mentions, sending out at times their unwholesome odour
from between the narrow chinks.

the wish to pray, to cast this heavy, darkening burden on to other
shoulders grew. deborah prayed to christ, as she had never prayed for
anything before, except her father, to give her faith and light to
throw off the gloom.

she might just as well have prayed to a stone wall; to pray was simply
to increase the gloom, an empty mirage that on approach mocked at the
struggling traveller's pain.

all the time she could spare from lessons she spent in that other
world; it was the one bright spot in her life, the thing for which she
was ineffably thankful.

one day at the beginning of the last year of the old century she sat
down to work out a problem in mechanics.

she never solved it. indefinitely she began to scribble on the paper as
in the olden time.

"oh, god!" she cried, "give me a man who can resist temptation for the
sake of good, and not because he is bound in by tradition or the world."

and straightway she left this world and flew to that other. there she
found the man she wanted, him who had gone there so strangely long ago
as it seemed from the printed picture.

and deborah began to write, and having once taken up the pen had not
the power to lay it down.

chapter xvii

from that time forward the village, its inmates, and the school became
blanks to her. true, the school dragged her down like a prison chain
each day, for she had grown to hate teaching, almost to loathe it. she
watched the clock from hour to hour as it crawled slowly round, and
longed with feverish impatience for the time when the trivial lessons
should be over and she free to write again.

never before had she written with such an absorbed interest, nor been
so utterly unconscious of everything around.

after the first few chapters of her book had been written a new light
suddenly burst upon it. it was as if in some curious way the crowd that
had always stood around in that other world was standing there. and
like lightning speed one night it came to her.

"these are the audience, those the living players," said a voice.

"well," she thought, stopping in the middle of a line, "how very
curious. and that crowd has always bothered me so. i could never
understand it."

and she went on again and never stopped; the whole thing seemed to have
gained a broader and a clearer meaning.

but progress in her writing meant sitting up many nights till midnight
and after, and next day the constant absorption would tell upon her,
and school became a species of martyrdom. the least noise would set
every nerve working, and the fidgetiness and ordinary naughtiness of
the children tried her almost beyond endurance. she did her best not
to show it, since one of the first rules of teaching is "never be
irritable with the children." like all other perfect rules it is almost
an impossibility. it might with advantage be amended to this—"be
irritable as rarely as possible, and let every offence you commit in
that direction translate itself into a firm resolve to guard as much
as possible against that error in the future." the whole force of the
precept lies in the second part.

as the story grew deborah found herself more and more entangled in it
and had no wish nor power to draw out. one night there came swimming
up in her brain the words of the fortune-teller. she remembered the
night well; it had been stormy and heavy, and there had been some peals
of thunder and flashes of lightning. suddenly there had grown up an
intense desire to take the part of the leading woman in her book. it
was not as if she had ever liked theatres, it was not as if the glamour
of footlights and applause had ever appealed to her; no, it grew out of
a wild and unrestrained jealousy.

"i love this man," she said to herself. "i've known him for fifteen
years and over, and he's always lived in my other world, and i can't
bear that he should belong to anybody else. i love this woman too,
and i've always known her, and i know exactly how she looks, and
laughs, and moves, and speaks, and i can do everything just as she
does—because—i don't know—because i can."

and deborah was happy, for the world showed itself in all its glorious
silver light. each night when she sat up writing alone she would take
the plain framed photo from the mantelpiece and set it there on the
table by her side, and before she put the light out she always kissed
it.

"you're not quite as good as my man," she would say, "but you're the
next best thing. and you will find this part just suits you."

thus the time flew on till the book was finished. a glorious, rosy,
golden time, in which every vision of ambition flashed across the
hitherto dull landscape.

at times would come that whispering warning,—

"suppose—suppose it should fail like all the rest."

and then the pain was like a ragged knife. she would walk across the
little sitting-room, back and forwards, back and forwards.

"no, no, it can't. it's all too real and true to me to ever fail. if
it fails it'll nearly kill me. i can't write anything better. i never
shall, however hard i try."

so, because she dared not, she never thought of failure.

as the last chapters drew to an end, there arose that most anxious
question to the uninitiated—"where must i send it?"

editors she had tried till she had sickened of the process; besides,
it was longer than the usual mss. sent, and not quite suitable for a
serial story. so she began to look round for a publisher, and picked
out one at random—one of whom she had never before heard; for of the
business part of literature she was deplorably ignorant.

next she decided, or thought she herself decided, to take it up to
town. that was a very unusual kind of thing for her to do, as she was
very nervous of strangers and strange places; but it showed what a
desperate state she had come to when she even determined to brave such
a very great man as a publisher.

"i'll just ask him if he'd mind reading it through carefully, because
when stories are sent by post i don't believe they ever look at them.
perhaps if i did take the trouble to go myself they would look at a
chapter or two. and after that i think they'd understand."

in the meantime she had sent the manuscript to be typewritten; but she
had given the typewriters rather short notice, and they were very busy,
and by the time the day arrived for her to go up to town a few of the
chapters were still missing.

she had made up her mind to go on a certain saturday, but was delayed
on account of the slowness of the typewriters till the following
thursday, when she went either from impatience or from a stronger
impulse, which she did not understand, for some of the chapters were
missing still.

*       *       *       *       *

ah, deborah! little do you foresee the terrible journey before you on
which your eager young heart is urging you—the horrible, treacherous
pitfalls, the cruel rocks, the wild, lonesome moors and wastes, the
vale of agony and humiliation, the sombre, silent forest of failure and
despair!

*       *       *       *       *

"and so," said plucritus to genius, "and so the time is drawing near
for the fulfilment of the curse?"

"the removal you mean."

"i mean what i say. can you seriously imagine that a book so full of
crudities and absurdities might be successful?"

"why, yes. the world is so full of common sense and wisdom that we can
afford to be magnanimous."

"and you intend to carry it through to the end?"

"yes—to the bitter end."

"that is a very apt expression—it implies so much, though frequent use
has made it commonplace. for all that you do not expect there will be
any bitter end; you expect this to go through fairly easily."

"well, yes, if things run smoothly; but i have always to reckon with
you."

"and i am a dangerous enemy. that book has not tended to make us any
better friends. i have been drawn into it with a familiarity which i
resent. caricature and laughter at the expense of those in power is
only excusable in the ignorant, and rarely pardonable even in them."

"you mistake," said genius, laughing. "the cap was never meant to fit
you; but if it does, why, then, you had better wear it."

plucritus was silent, till at last he remarked, with a decided sneer,—

"deborah expects great things from this book. it is to be the making
of her name and fortune, and is to translate her from a plain and
insignificant village schoolmistress into one of the first actresses of
the day."

genius interjected: "deborah is so wrapped up in me that she is
unconscious what she wants; however, that will settle itself later."

"well, yes," rejoined plucritus, and he laughed. "a bigger fool than
she never walked this earth. experience scarcely seems to have the
power to teach her anything."

"you should blame me," said genius. "deborah, apart from teaching
children, is very irresponsible."

"well, and it is my duty," observed plucritus, in his hardest,
cruellest voice, "to make all people on this earth responsible; we do
not recognise an irresponsible person. they are useless except to form
the everlasting bulwarks. but may i ask you (since you wish to bring
the responsibility upon yourself), may i ask you why you have thrown
yourself so signally on the side of virginius? he regards you with
little favour and no friendship, and for the last twelve years or more
he has been perfectly immaterial."

"i have thrown myself on his side," said genius, "because, try as i
will, i cannot but admire him. i have watched him narrowly though he
seems but a negative, silent power, and i have been more than struck by
the patient dignity with which he has stood under insults and lies and
calumny. probably it is the attraction of opposites—as my own impulse
is to answer fire for fire and be magnanimous only in victory."

"are you quite sure your twelve years' study have been profitable?"
asked plucritus.

"quite."

"if you had taken my advice you would have left studying spirits and
have confined your attention to the world."

"the world!" cried genius. "i have studied the world, and have found
it about as interesting as a repeating decimal, a long continuance of
redundancy."

"once virginius advised you to restrain your contempt for the world.
it was the only piece of wise advice he ever gave you. but we will
wait and see the issue of this marvellous book, which is to remove
hereditary curses, lighten the author's faith, and work as many
impossibilities as are contained in its leaves themselves."

chapter xviii

the silent forest[1]

then deborah, walking alone in the shade of evening, came on the
outskirts of a dense forest. the foliage within was thick and feathery,
the branches heavy and dark. above there hung a cloud so black that it
sent a dull shadow through the dull leaves, and made the ground below
blacker than itself.

just outside the cloud, where the sky was pale with the after-glow
of clear evening, shone a star, a very large and bright one. but the
cloud was so heavy that it hung over the whole forest like some dark
curse. it looked like a thunder-cloud that could not burst, being held
by iron chains covered with black rust. there was unutterable silence
in the forest, so that you looked in with a strange fear, and then
turned away, and yet again returned. surely no living thing stirred or
breathed in there!

[footnote 1: there are indications in the paging of this chapter in
ms. that it was written separately from the previous chapters. it
was afterwards added and the connection is obviously incomplete. to
this state of incompletion may be referred the indefiniteness of
the conclusion, though it may have been also part of the author's
deliberate intention.—ed. note.]

a great dampness rose from the ground, a vapour in the gathering
twilight, as it rises in the marshy districts near the sea. now a bat
whirled out from the gloom on to the lonely flats, and then came a
sound like the hoot of an owl. but was it an owl? oh, no. it was one
more "exceeding bitter cry," at the bitter end, you know.

then, there is life in the breathless forest after all.

the cry was repeated, louder and clearer, and it died away, you know
how, just as if it wanted somehow or other to cling on to life. you
didn't like to hear the end of that last cry; it was so inarticulate
that it spoke.

but it ended at last, as all such end. what had happened to it? it had
fallen among the black leaves.

it had touched the black water. there is a very still deep in the
silent forest, and its waters run slowly but surely. it's part of the
curse, you know, raindrops distilled from the black cloud.

it was only one of many deeps, but the silence had fallen again, even
deeper it seemed than before, till a breeze swept over the tops of the
trees, and here is what it sang as it passed:—

"this is the forest of failure. here is the humiliation vale. it
is filled with tears which are never seen, and sighs that are
never heard. all mankind has to tread it—now or then—now or
then—willy-nilly—each man treads it, and alone, now or then."

deborah saw a gate and passed in. and over the gate there was a prayer
written, just as we see writing through a looking-glass.

"i ought to know that prayer," she thought.

"it is the lord's prayer," said a voice.

"no. i think it is too short," and the gate clanged to with a horrible
grate.

"i want to go out." it was too late—too late. but what pretty flowers
grew along the path! white ones with yellow eyes, and jessamine, and
even pink wild roses, and honeysuckle too. yet when you picked them
they fell like dust.

"this is very strange," thought deborah. "i thought they were real."

but no one answered, unless silence answered—no one at all.

and, looking on the ground, she saw that it was all covered with soft
black dust, before and after.

"it is easy to walk upon," said she. "and the flowers look pretty as
they grow, but the silence and the gloom frighten me just a little."

and then suddenly black rocks rose in the path with little jagged
edges. they cut into your shoes and hurt you ever so much, and instead
of getting better the road became worse.

presently from between two black rocks shot out a crimson fountain
across the path.

deborah stood still.

"it looks like blood," she said, and shuddered. "and it kills all the
flowers as it passes on. i don't like this wood, i think i'll go back."

but when you looked behind briars had grown across the path, and the
silence was so terrible that it seemed to say "go on." and there was
only one way to tread, and that was through the path of blood.

so deborah went on, and the red stream soaked through the thin shoes,
and sent a strange kind of pain to her heart.

"it's just like having toothache very badly, only i never knew of a
dentist who could pull out hearts." but the pain became so bad that
for the time she was silent too, like everything else round about.
and then the stream flowed into a deep chasm that seemed to lead
underground, only now and again you could hear the gurgling as it went,
so that it never seemed to pass away, not quite.

after a time the road looked better again, for the rocks had vanished,
but now and then in the gloom you put your foot down on a very sharp
one, and when you drew it up quickly it gave you cramp, so that you
almost feared to put it down.

this path made you very tired. you kept slipping because you could not
see properly, and the worst of it was there was no path out, nor any
back. you were forced forward by silence, that cruel and most perfect
teacher that sneers at heartaches and pain, and looks with a withering
smile on self-pity.

you see it was a magical forest; to stand still was to fall, to fall
was to be stifled by something. it is best to go on, therefore, as long
as you can. and then, after a weary length of road had been travelled,
the gloom turned to darkness, so gradually that at first you thought it
was your eyes that were dim; and ever from the unseen channel came the
gurgle of the stream, the only sound in the still forest.

presently the darkness had turned to blackness, so that you groped the
way along; and now the weird silence and the gentle sound of the unseen
stream led you between them in blind faith, till with a sudden bubble
the stream shot up again and you slipped in the quagmire of leaves.

but the road was so black that you did not see the colour of the
stream, and you thought it black too; and it softened the leaves and
the black dust, and your feet slipped in it, and the pain was coming
back to your heart as it had come at the fountain long since, only
worse if anything, and perhaps different.

then the road grew much worse, for this unseen fluid was covering it.
suddenly a light shone overhead, the first along the whole dark path,
and soon it died away.

but to deborah standing there uncertainly came a figure, a gliding
spirit wearing a curious robe. at times it shone white as silver, and
again black as dusky night.

"how familiar is this figure," thought deborah. "in some ways it is
like the prayer. i ought to know it, and yet i don't."

but being extremely weary, for the road made you so, she had scarcely
the strength to think at all.

this forest makes every mortal weary that passes through it. oh! very,
very weary. it teaches you so much too; more than the most brilliant
ball-room or entertainment or anything that the gay world can give. it
is a magical forest, you know. when the dust falls from the flowers
silence says, "were not those pretty little baubles? anywhere but in
the dark path they would have won a first-class prize for brilliancy
and colour." and then silence laughs as the dust flickers down. "the
world would build a hot-house for one of these posies, and pay a
thousand guineas down if it were fashion. ah! but you are in the dark
path and must travel on. we stand no whims, we who govern here. though
your feet ache and your ankles are weary you must still go on or the
black leaves will stifle you. do you hear the gurgle of the stream?
it's pain, you know. silence and pain. twin sisters. gurgle, gurgle.
your father has trod it all before. how his feet ached too! poor
father!"

oh! this stream is a very teaching stream. it makes men feel to the
very marrow of the bone. it stings to the core so that brilliant lights
flash from your aching, feverish eyes, and the world laughs and says,
"ah! that was very good." not knowing what a sepulchre it laughs at.

now let us go back to the spirit, standing there in the forest.

it isn't an angel, and not even a spirit of paradise, not in the
accepted sense; but it is so familiar to deborah that she rubs her eyes
and looks again, and can make nothing of it.

"it's dante out of one of the pictures," says she; but even that did
not solve the riddle, not at all.

"it is that being who guided him." but no.

it was indeed hard to describe this spirit, for it was so transparent
and yet so real. you could see the trees through the graceful robe
quite plainly, yea, and something more. you could see other black paths
in the forest which had hitherto been hidden. for this place was all
magical, and the spirit was magical too. it had the power of explaining
the key to life, or rather lives, and no sooner did you look through it
than the whole forest became peopled with poor drudges in the shape of
men. and it made you irresistibly sad. here you saw a man struggling
on, his feet all drenched with the red stream that to him looked black.
he had fallen, and the black leaves smirched with blood clung to his
poor lean ribs. now he staggered. good god! would he fall again? oh,
yes. hark! the bitter cry! and outside in the world a shrill laugh
went up, for as he fell he kicked out somewhat with his heels and the
devil translated it onto a comic canvas, and made it appear too funny
for words. he is still now. the black leaves cover him. what was his
last living thought? god's secret and his own.

and lo! _there_ is another path, and along it crawls a woman, all
alone—there are no pairs in the forest of failure, silence will see to
that. there is the red dye again, that to her looks black.

it is a very fragile woman, with a lovely face, which the gloom hides.
she has very tender feet, and there are so many flinty stones along the
path. the black leaves cling to her skirts like millstones.

there! another fall! no upward struggle here. there is a golden hoop of
a wedding-ring that slips off the skeleton finger into the thin stream.
it is dyed blood red. and there is another little plaything in her
hand, a baby's rattle, red too. why, you know, it is only the failure
of domestic love; and when she falls there is no cry in the accepted
sense; a childish sob that speaks more than words, and in the outside
world the shout of drunken revelry has drowned it. that's how it is the
tears and sighs of the mighty forest are never heard.

and there were very many other paths, and many faces; and on all the
faces suffering was written, so that there was a terrible beauty and
refinement in the forest. you see it was not the forest of sin, or
reckless self-indulgence, but the forest of silence and pain, that do
not allow of them.

now i said that the spirit's robes were transparent; they reflected,
or rather revealed, things that were beyond. but all this deborah took
in vaguely, or perhaps it seemed to her she had been used to looking
through that figure all her life, so there was nothing very wonderful
in the sights it showed.

but the face deborah was not so sure about. it was a face as perfectly
moulded as if it were cut in marble. there was no trace of human
passion or emotion on it. a broad brow, a calm eye, a straight nose
with finely-cut nostrils, a mouth of exquisite beauty, if somewhat
coldly drawn, and a well-shaped chin.

the whole figure was one of grace and calmness, strangely out of
keeping with the human agony around. why, even now, through the clear
robe appeared a face of such exceeding torture that it sent a sickly
feeling to the heart. then suddenly the white robes turned to a dusky
black and hid the pale, hopeless features.

"don't you know me, deborah?"

"well," thought deborah, "it's just as if someone were playing the
‘frühlingslied' backwards. i know that voice, and yet i don't." but
aloud she said,—

"i expect if you were to tell me who you are i should perhaps remember
you."

at this the spirit laughed, and deborah started, for of all places in
which to hear such a sound that seemed the most unlikely, and moreover,
the alteration in the face was so complete that it was almost dazzling.

"this is a very heartless spirit," thought she. "i could not have
laughed in this wood, not for anything. the agony is too sacred."

and, as if interpreting her thoughts, the spirit answered, "let us
walk out of the forest on to the moors. they are lonely and cold, and
the night wind is keen. we can hear, and see, and understand better
there."

and he led the way by some unknown path on to a high moorland dotted
with crags, with hills rising black in the distance. stars were shining
bright in the clear sky, for it had deepened to that length of twilight
which approaches night. a crescent moon rose over the irregular bank
of mountains—the narrowest, clearest crescent, like a thin slit in
the blue-grey heaven. over there was the sound of running water.
how different from the deep gurgle of the wood! and there the white
splashing of a waterfall over a rocky bed. there was a clump of fir
trees and the smell of the pine forest; and there—oh! what was that?
oh! only another bitter cry, and you thought it was the cry of a dog or
wolf in the autumn's frosty distance.

"one hears very plainly on this moorland," observed the spirit, and
smiled again. "this is the sounding board and mirror of the world. one
hears and sees. one pays a pretty dear price, but i think it is the one
of the few things that returns full value."

deborah was silent. the moor was so unutterably lonely; a vaster
loneliness than the forest; it did not stifle, it awed.

"look over there," pointed the spirit, "where the sky is hidden by the
black billows of cloud. that inky pile is always there. below it you
see the gloomy mass of the forest boundary. black, black, always black.
now i will hold this wing of my robe with my hand, so. look through it
towards the silent wood. what do you see?"

"bubbles of light floating here and there at intervals amongst the
trees."

"will-o'-the-wisps. here—there—up and down—now quick, now slow.
watch and listen earnestly."

and deborah, looking through the robe, saw the bubbles shining in
the darkness; and listening, heard the sound of faintest music—harp
strings and bells—and the lights kept time to them. ting! ting! they
danced in the branches, balls of clearest, transparent light. oh! there
was a beauty! crimson and larger than most. the spirit moved slightly,
the scene became clearer. why, it was another dark path, and the ball,
moving airily, lit it up as it tossed gracefully forward to the magic
sounds. another figure in the path. this time a man. and he was running
and stumbling forward in the darkness, grasping at the dazzling ball.
but it always evaded him. the music quickened—his step quickened also.
the shining globe danced forward. then he, being weary, for the road
had been long and dark, and he had stumbled often, leant back against a
gnarled tree trunk, his chin sunk upon his breast. his was a very ashen
face, with sunken eyes; blackened leaves smirched all with red stuck
to him everywhere. the clear ball, swung by a backward motion, danced
to where he leant with the weariness of death, and stood suspended in
the air before him. he raised his eyes and looked at it for one second,
then the lids fell again. it danced nearer, swung itself even till
it grazed his hand. stung to life by the touch he started quivering.
the red light was reflected in his eyes. the ball rose in the air to
the level of his head. with a sudden plunge forward he caught it in
both hands. it burst and fell around him in crimson flames of blood.
over head, and face, and hands, and shoulders. ugh! think of it. hist!
ssh! the music is still. with both hands raised above his head in
helpless agony, his face drawn back, he staggers sideways. hark! 'tis
the bitter cry. oh! but this is agony, exceeding agony, burning to the
brain and heart. that bitter, bitter, bitter cry. to hear it sends the
blood like icicles to the heart, and makes it run slower and colder
for ever after. he doesn't fall. his tattered coat has caught in the
forked branch of a tree. he looks like a dancing puppet run down and
left unstrung. his legs, and arms, and head hang limp and lifeless. he
has gone. but there is something grotesque about him after all. scarce
has the last low wail died away before a roar of laughter rises. an
excellent joke provided for the world, because the upnotes of his cry
resembled somewhat the crowing of a cock.

ah! there is another glimmering light—blue this time and purple.
another path—another figure. only a woman now. round! round! in a
giddy whirl the ball flies. her feet are cut by briars and stones, and
the red stream has dyed them.

will-o'-the-wisp! will-o'-the-wisp! what devil's cruelty has put you
there? will you burst too and shower your death-pangs on her gentle
head? why, no. suddenly, as by a puff of unfelt wind, the dancing
flame goes out. the music stops. she stands still in the path that to
her has turned to fatal blackness, her eyes wide open, staring into
space. then, terrified by the darkness and the hopeless failure, she
gives one terrible scream. no soul could stay in a body after that; it
would rend the very heart-strings. she falls down too; and because the
road has been long and weary, and the rocks sharp, the scanty clothes
have been badly torn, and in the fall they have slipped aside and show
more of the human form than this world reckons decent. very tender
limbs, worn thin with pain and silent suffering. but again the devil
translates it. the spirit's robe has changed, and deborah looks down on
a different scene, one of the world's own.

it is a company of women, dressed in the loveliest gossamer and jewels
that money can provide. arms and busts shine out in satiny smoothness,
and the slight veiling discloses other charms. this is the lap of
luxury and chastity—that ill-matched pair which the world pretends can
grow abreast.

there is a very lovely woman in the midst, clothed all in white, and as
the scream dies away these are the words she's saying: "alas! too true!
and was it not disgusting?" and the other women yawn, and echo, with
airy laughs, "oh! terribly disgusting."

and deborah, looking round on the chill moor, sees it peopled with
white spirits all looking in the same direction, to that vision of fair
women.

and then the curtain falls upon them, and deborah, looking at the forms
around her, sees a smile on every lip of scarcely veiled cynicism. "oh!
terribly disgusting," they cry with the right accent and tone, and look
at one another and laugh as spirits will, and then disappear once more.

the spirit turned to deborah.

"the voice of that woman is as clear as a bell," he remarked, with a
cruel smile. "think you it would echo well through the silent forest?"

"i cannot say," answered deborah.

he laughed.

"some day we shall hear it," he went on. "now or then, willy-nilly,
each man treads it, and alone—now or then."

"but she seemed a wealthy woman of the world."

"and she will die a success to the world," he rejoined, kicking a
pebble thoughtfully with his sandalled foot, so that flint sparks shot
from it. "but we have all to reckon with eternity. it can canker and
rust, and make harsh discord of one-time harmony. a rusty bell with a
broken clapper is not very delightful to the ear at the best of times.
now let us sit down on this rock and talk. see, i will draw my mantle
round you, and then we shall scarce feel the cold."

so they sat down. and the crescent moon rose higher, and the stars
shone brighter, and the waterfall splashed merrily near by.

"it is night now in the world," said the spirit. "here we come to view
the great theatre. do you think it is worth the price?"

deborah shivered.

"it is not for me to judge," she replied. "perhaps i'm a coward."

the spirit smiled.

"so you think the price paid to come to this chill dreary place too
dear."

"oh, yes, yes. left to myself i never would have come."

for some minutes they waited in silence. suddenly the middle of the
black cloud changed to a dusky red, and took a shape—the old,
timeworn shape, the cross. and on it hung the sacred figure. great
drops of blood dripped from hands and feet and brow, and trickled
between the thick branches into the silent wood. the pale bloodless
face hung low. outside in the world the big clock at westminster struck
the midnight hour. "one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine." no more. there came then that bitter cry—the bitterest the
still air has ever heard or the wide world ever known—the keynote
from which every voice in the forest takes its pitch, and it was
those words, which must strike a chill even to the heart of the most
thoughtless—"my god! my god! why hast thou forsaken me?" and oh! the
lingering moan on that last word! what father could ever thus torture
his own beloved son, who had given up all and suffered all for him?

the gay streets of the world were rowdy and noisy—carriages, hansoms,
'buses driving everywhere. laughter and songs and shouting.

but deborah shuddered.

"why did you bring me here for this?"

"to hear the bitterest cry of all. do you wonder at the blackness of
the cloud now? it contains such mental agony and human pain. it's the
great curse, you know, that the world calls a blessing, and says can
save it from the power of hell. reckoned from the world's storehouse
that cramped figure was a marvellous fool. he had brains enough to have
won a kingdom, and he'd learnt no more from his early trade than to
make use of two rough planks of wood."

then, as it had come, the pained vision melted away. but afterwards
you never looked at the dark cloud without seeming to see the red drops
flowing from it into the stifling groves below.

"that is the baptism and the cup he speaks of," said the spirit. "it is
the reservoir of the gurgling streams."

"but is he suffering all the time?"

"no. no. it is the reflection from the forest. that cross overhangs the
central part, where he of his own free will fell down among the leaves,
in silence and in desolation. the learned jews shook their sides with
laughing when he fell, but rather strangely he rose again the third
day."

"and the blood that flows, is it not real?"

"oh, yes! very real," replied the spirit, smiling. "having felt it i
thought you would have known. it's pain, you know. just in the same
way that the sun attracts the moisture from the earth and lets it drop
again, so that cloud attracts the red-dyed dew and drops it every
evening.

"now we will walk on a little and turn our backs upon the forest
and the cloud. our moon is growing brighter. every night after that
wild cry has died away it rounds to fulness, and the stars, gaining
brilliancy in the tingling air, glance and gleam with uncommon
witchery. this is my natural home, deborah; i love it, love it, with
a wild, fierce love. i had rather hear that cry and laugh than any
charm of music. i had rather see those scenes of agony and the world's
scenes of joy than any rose-bowered garden on the earth. then when i
sicken of both i turn to the moorland and the hill, the cold quietness
that reckons naught of either pain or pleasure. i wander here on the
ridge of hills and in the shadows of caves, and then with a sudden
whimsical change of feeling i turn to social life again, and receive
the courtesies of pretty women and the respect of men."

there was a long silence—not broken for a long time—till deborah
said, "why are you so silent?"

and the spirit answered, "i am thinking—thinking—thinking—and why
should i not think? ting! ting! listen to the magic music in the wood.
will-o'-the-wisps are dancing everywhere. harp strings and bells,
neither of heaven or earth. blue and purple. red and yellow. green and
golden. now in, now out. ting! ting! the magic music in the magic wood.
wild flowers and myrtle—black dust and dying leaves—stones smeared
with blood—and the deep dull gurgle of the stream—raindrops distilled
from the black cloud. ting! ting! tinkle! twinkle! tired feet keep time
to the magic sounds. dull brains grow brilliant. cold blood grows warm.
ting! ting! now in. now out. up and down. unreal sounds in the silent
forest. unreal lights in the blackened paths. ting! ting! silver bells,
golden strings, and burning balls. baubles for fools! what! darkness
and silence! silence and darkness! twin sisters. grope! grope! with
trembling fingers and blinded eyes. hark! the bitter cry! and the echo
from the world. the worse the cry, the louder the laugh."

and whilst he spoke those glorious eyes were shining with a gloomy,
far-off light.

"he trusted in another man," he said.

deborah shuddered. "that is what poor father did."

"i know. i know. god grant him a double blessing. god grant him a
double blessing."

"he went one autumn night to meet a man. i held his coat and got his
hat, and shut the door behind him. and when he came back i said,
‘father, did you see him?' and he looked at me and answered, ‘he—he
did not come.'"

"poor father," said the spirit, softly.

and overhead the star shone, and the magic moon was still high in
heaven, and the waterfall sparkled, and the stream ran lightly on, and
the hills were clear and the moorland frosty and cold.

"i love this place too," observed deborah. "even to the wind and the
glittering frost crystals. but when we turn and look toward the silent
forest i need to hold you very tight. it makes my heart ache, and the
blackness sticks. would god it could be turned to a garden of summer
roses!" and then plucritus, prince of the powers of evil, turned and
looked at her and laughed. and on his finger gleamed the _opal_
ring.

ting! ting! the magic music and the magic fire!

then another bitter cry and all was still.

end of part i

part ii

hell

chapter i

[the want of the author's revising hand is here evident. there is no
literary link between this part of the story and "earth." the reader
will, however, perceive that it is genius who is now telling his
experiences to deborah. where deborah is does not seem quite clear.
the concluding passages of the last chapter in "earth" suggest her
death. genius presently alludes to her "lost soul in the wilderness,"
so that apparently she is in a kind of purgatory, in close
communication with genius. the connection between genius and deborah
is exceedingly intimate throughout, and as we have the author's own
word that deborah goes to heaven, it may be presumed that she is there
entirely merged in genius. at any rate she does not reappear in person
after "earth."

we have the author's own word that deborah represents herself. deborah
probably symbolises the human, genius the mental and spiritual element
in the personality of the author; some confirmation of which may be
found in the clearly-expressed assertion of the dual personality of
the saviour (in "heaven")—namely, as jesus in his human aspect, as
christ in his spiritual. with regard to plucritus and virginius, the
conjecture may be hazarded that the former embodies deborah's lower
tendencies, the latter her higher soul.—ed. note.]

you, deborah, remember the summer evening when i left you. it was no
more pleasure to me than you, though i cannot say that then the pain
which i experienced equalled yours. the force which parted us, the
first time for so many years, was stronger than my own. for i had made
a bet upon the book, and by the bet i sacrificed my ring, the only
safeguard i possessed.

between two forces, good and evil, i had stood alone, leaning to one
who ever faced me cold and silently. time and again i tried to break
the weary barrier down, and in you that generated feeble efforts unto
prayer. i had followed your lost soul about the wilderness, sprinkling
flowers upon the barren ground, and unripe fruit, which withered. but
ever like the thirsty wanderer i looked in search of fruitful soil.
good and evil stalked with me all the time side by side, the one
laughing, jesting all the way, the other silent, almost wordless.

mirage followed mirage, till at last the angel said, "dig for the well."

then, as in the olden times, like our first fathers, i set to work
laboriously. hindrance followed hindrance, and the task was slow and
painful, more so to you because you could not understand the cause of
pain.

but to return to the present and my going. the journey was long, yet
short, and i took it alone. it led through a mighty forest dark as
night, chilly and damp, with here and there the shining coils of a
sleeping serpent lying prone across the path. this was the mighty
vestibule to hell, that spread through space by regions infinite. here
the traveller may often lose himself and fall down starved and dead.
here the sinuous snake will coil its writhing body round him and drag
him o'er the unresisting slimy soil right to the prison gates which he
in life so feared—or, maybe, laughed at.

by the side of blackened pools and hideous precipice i passed far out
into the wild. the darkness was as clear as light before me, for i
saw with darkened sight. crags, rocks and gurgling torrents, flowing
through dreary chasms, met my eyes, and the further i went the lonelier
i ever grew, for the pressure of intensity had fallen on to silence
and the power of goodness no longer walked beside.

i saw the glorious bubbles floating round me—red, purple,
golden-yellow, green—i heard the magic music as it tinkled, i saw the
victim quiver when it stilled. i heard the helpless cry, and then the
laugh of devils as it died; i heard the feeble, far-off echo of the
world, and darker, drearier grew the scene.

one by one the bubbles burst and fainter grew, note by note the music
died upon the ear, the mortal cry of pain was left behind, and silence,
born of all, closed round me as i trod.

then before me in the distance gleamed the danger-lights of hell,
bloody-red against the darkness, clear and piercing as they shone. as i
drew nearer they shone still clearer, lighting up the shining bulwarks,
polished and cut like myriads of gem-strewn columns in the night.

the heavy gates were open, no sound disturbed my thought, yet i stood
still upon the threshold and looked behind. far off in the distance
through the darkness gleamed a gloomy, lurid light upon a leaden ball,
and on the farther side, almost like giant shadows on a giant curtain,
two giant forms were struggling for the ball.

but that to me had little interest. why should it have? who ever yet
upon hell's threshold glanced back except to breathe the air that is
not? for misery had come, and desolation, and mistrust, that fiend of
fiends which eats the hearts of kings and poisons homesteads, bringing
one general curse to all.

thus far i had come alone and unattended, but as i passed beneath the
overwhelming shadow i became conscious of this other world.

and the thing that struck me most on entering was the deathly silence
hanging over all. and the next thing that struck me was the weird,
unnatural beauty of the scene. and the next that i was now no longer
quite alone.

to a broad avenue, banked by sculptured terraces and crowned with
towering mansions, i had come, yet in this city of the night no living
form appeared, till, looking up above to some alabaster steps carved by
some magic hand, i beheld a spirit woman watching me.

even as i looked she moved toward me, with all the grace and lightness
which spirits may possess.

"you are dull of seeing, dull of hearing, dull at recognising," she
said, and i heard the siren's voice and remembered my lost ring. i had
no voice to answer, till with an effort i had roused myself.

"and you, it seems, are duller at receiving."

"how so?" she asked, and laughed and drew much nearer, so that i
recognised the more this spirit beauty.

"i come like an unwelcome guest, finding no preparation at the end of
travel."

"indeed," she answered, "all has been prepared, but it was done in
silence. we knew your hatred of display. and is it true that you are
here without one bite, one ugly serpent twist to mar your strength or
beauty? then indeed you are welcome. come this way."

she led me by the steps of alabaster under the shade of heavy drooping
trees. we passed along the margin of a river, by many statues of
exceeding beauty, whose images were reflected in its bed. but to me,
foreign to this nature, the gloom and heavy grandeur were oppressive.
even to my feet the hard, unbending marble brought weariness and pain.

"lady," i said at last, "this kingdom is in need of something. it lacks
a joyful element of sound."

at this she laughed, and there was beauty in it, maybe some merriment.

"you are dull of hearing," she repeated, and looked back at me and
stayed, then laughed again. she pointed toward the river.

"come nearer," she went on. "now listen, listen." and she raised a
finger. "does it not run so? gurgle, gurgle! is there no rhythm in
that?" and as i listened i could hear the sound.

"there is no joyousness in it," i said.

"you are dull of understanding," she repeated, and laughed again and
moved along.

her dress, now that i came to see it more distinctly and follow it more
closely in the unnoticeable haze, was of the clearest shade of twilight
inlaid with many a shining gem.

and still we passed along, till on a sudden we lit on a great and
glorious building among the trees and jewel-spraying fountains. from
every window sparkled brilliant light.

"that is my home," she said, and pointed to it.

at length, when i had looked some time and viewed its every pinnacle
and spire, buttress and gable, tower and minaret, i turned to her.

"is this a church or palace, pleasure house or prison?" i questioned.

"oh, stranger, you are dull at seeing," she replied, and shook her head.

and then, for the first time since coming there, i smiled; this
creature's fascination told on me, the only seeming-living thing about
the place.

"you will come home with me," she urged. "i am alone, but what of that?
poor company will suffice one night. and to-morrow who knows? i may
expect my husband home."

"your husband?" i queried.

she placed her hand on my arm and drew her lips close to my ear. her
eyes were laughing, and her voice.

she whispered lightly, "i think you are mistaking this for heaven."

"that would be the greatest compliment," i rejoined.

her manner altered to one of sarcasm and scorn.

"if you esteem it so, why do you linger here?"

"that is an answer quite beyond me," i made answer. "i think i linger
here because i must."

"yes—as a prisoner," she said slowly. "a much-prized prisoner, almost
like a guest."

we had reached the broad flight of steps that led toward the entrance.
here she stood still and took my left hand in her right, and with her
other placed upon my finger a narrow circlet of blood-red stones. i
looked at it with vain regret; to me there was no beauty in these gems.
i remembered my own fair jewels and remorse more keen that i had felt
before cut to my heart.

"stranger, how little courtesy you show! silent and thankless even for
a gift."

"i remember another ring more beautiful than this," i answered.

her eyes lit up with that intensity which in its lesser forms mortals
call greed.

"be content with what you get," she remarked. "those stones are
priceless—millions could scarcely buy them; your stones are the dross
of that little planet, earth—bought, perhaps, with trumpery silver."

i was then silent, and together we went up the steps.

the entrance was barred with gates of gold. they were like the iron
ones that protect churches. inside these gates was a high arched
door. it was like the door of some cathedral—covered with knobs. but
they were not of rusted iron; they glowed like carbuncles in a carved
setting, which was itself in substance like black oak.

at her touch the heavy gates drew back, the gloomy door flew open.

beyond was an arched space like the central aisle of some large temple.

and as we stood upon the threshold i looked in upon the dim, dark
grandeur. blood-red lighted censers swung from the golden fluted roof.
they lit up the fluted pillars that branched out into the most delicate
arches eye could wish.

here was the sound of organ music beautiful to hear, yet to my ears it
came like a paining memory of long ago.

"do you not like our music?" she asked.

"it is short of but one thing," i answered as we went in, "and that is
joyousness."

the door closed behind us and the music ceased. presently it began
again. i listened enraptured and entranced.

"what do you think of that?" she queried.

"that is not joyous, it is madness—an elation which does not last."

"you are very bad to please. or rather, let me use my old argument, i
will say that you are dull."

at the farther end, above a high-standing altar, rose a mighty
crucifix. it was so beautiful, so real, so truthful in its silent
agony, that, looking through the dusk, it startled me.

i grasped the yielding arm beside me.

"what is that?" i questioned sharply.

"you a christian and so dull?" she exclaimed. "that is christ, the
carpenter, the king, the god, the tool, the fool, anything, everything.
whatever you will. is it not like him?"

the airy mockery in her tone jarred on me.

"go nearer," she continued, "look at it closer. it is worth studying,
and is of excellent workmanship. everything in these places should be
and is of the best."

i went nearer as she bade me. it was indeed of exquisite workmanship.

"i had not thought to meet with that in hell," i said at length.

"i do not think you could get it better done in heaven," she observed,
and laughed and turned away.

i too turned from it, with a horrible repugnance growing in me
mixed with extreme pain. i saw this figure for the first time in an
unexpected place, and something within me struggled for expression, yet
found none. beneath the crucifix, which was exceeding highly placed,
broad flights of steps led up to a crimson altar, and above the altar
was a handsome doorway of gold, which reached just so high as the
saviour's feet.

i noticed with some curiosity and surprise that she was ascending the
steps before us. i followed with cold yet burning interest, for in this
place white heat is only quenched with ice, and ice melted with white
heat alone.

but when we reached the upper step the altar was invisible. it had
vanished, and the door alone remained before us. it opened, as all
things opened here, silent and swiftly.

she had been watching, and espied my look of evident astonishment,
which amused her.

"the lights are thrown on in such a manner that when you are below you
imagine you see an arrangement something like a table," she said. "but
that would be a very inconvenient, and at the same time undignified,
way of approaching the doorway, and i should have thought your own
common sense would tell you it was nothing but a sham—a myth rather, i
might say."

we stood upon the threshold and looked down the dim, grand aisle.

no painter ever yet imagined in his fondest, highest dream a scene of
richer grandeur. in place of the straight-backed pews of churches,
jewelled thrones ranged tier behind tier, meeting the eye with
ever-gleaming, changing light. over the font there hung by finest cords
of diamond and ruby intermingled, a royal crown, its golden background
hidden by gems. a great golden bird spread out its giant wings below
us, every feather tipped with curious light, and on its back rested
the mighty bible opened at the gospel according to st john. the twelve
apostles stood out in bold relief around the pulpit, and from the
tasseled cushion on the desk a simple cross was hanging in needlework
of gold.

yet all this glittering, gleaming brilliancy was subdued by the dimness
of the light, and the organ-loft shone out almost as from a mist of
unreal glamour.

she paused beside the open door and looked behind. i stood and looked
upon it too.

"what wealth! what countless millions have been spent on this," i
murmured.

she laughed; and when she laughed it seemed as if the jewels gleamed
more magically.

"yes," she affirmed, "countless millions have been spent. it is the
work of ages, and has been built to the glory and praise of god
eternal."

then she turned away, and i turned too and gazed within the doorway.

a large hall of great expanse met our eyes. from its sides many doors
led off, and passages, and here and there on the right side high
windows opened on the gardens we had left.

i had hoped on leaving the dim church to throw off the deep depression
that hung round me, but it was hopeless.

from without there came the sound of singing birds, the splash of
fountains, a gentle music, but i recognised they might as well be
silent for all the joyousness they brought to me.

the beauties of the hall were lost except to my intellect. i regarded
them calmly and with an interest that had dulled.

exquisite workmanship in furniture met my eye at every turn. the
painted ceilings, the polished floor of rich mosaic, the easeful
chairs that were in themselves like flattering apologies for graceful
broad-armed thrones, the squares of rich-coloured carpet, the inlaid
tables with their fine carved legs, the couches piled with softest
cushions, the massive fireplaces filled with living coal, met my eye
and left merely the impression of a dream.

yet i strove to find some pleasure, but could find none.

from this she led the way into an apartment which was smaller and more
adaptable for private life.

its beauty was like all the rest, on the richest, finest scale.

she beckoned me toward a sofa by the fireplace, in which the flames
leapt lightly, and with a sudden feeling of weariness i threw myself
down on it.

"you are tired, stranger," she said softly. "sleep, sleep, and wake
refreshed. the journey has been long, longer than mortal thought can
reckon."

and then, overcome with weariness and exhaustion, i slept, and for the
time remembered nothing more.

chapter ii

when i awoke, night had fallen without, and i was alone. the fire still
burnt brightly, and what other light was needed came from an electric
candelabra hanging from the centre of the room. i looked around and
noticed for the first time that the walls were lined with book-shelves
extending from the ceiling to the floor. with some curiosity i
approached and scanned the titles. they were all the works of writers
eminent on earth, some dead, some living—mostly dead. one book,
which it surprised me greatly to find there, i took down and opened.
but beneath the title on the inner leaf was written in manuscript
the words, "with the author's compliments," and then there came the
signature. i put it back with some surprise and took another, and it
also contained those words. then i took others, and they likewise had
similar writing in them. at length my eyes lit on a bible.

"surely this will not be with ‘compliments,'" i thought, and took it
down.

but there the writing was just as in all the others, except that no
signatures were given.

i passed through from book to book, and before each the self-same words
appeared, till i came to the gospels. and here the wording altered. it
was simply "from the writer." from that i passed on to the revelation;
there the old wording had returned.

i closed the book and left it on a table and walked to the fireplace.

"someone here or somewhere has a sense of humor," i thought. "or i am
in a strange yet vivid dream from which i cannot wake."

i was not alone long. shortly the door opened and plucritus entered.

his entrance surprised me, yet on second thoughts it seemed natural
enough.

"i was sorry not to come along with you," he said in his customary easy
way. "but i have made the most haste i could; yet even now my stay is
only for a short time."

his eye rested on the bible.

"psalm singing?" he asked.

"no. i have been greatly struck by—"

"the dedications," he interjected, laughing.

"no—the gifts."

"oh. it is only natural. the bible at one time was so interesting, and
at the same time so expensive, that i made friends with the writers
and obtained copies gratis. you must admit that the binding and
illuminations alone are in themselves treasures of art."

"indeed," i observed drily, "everything about here seems so precious
and expensive that a little poverty and plainness would be most
acceptable."

he sat down on the sofa i had left.

"you are in a bad temper," he remarked simply. "but if you wish to see
what you term poverty you shall see it soon enough. but not now, for i
will have—let me see (and here he glanced at a curious kind of clock
above the fireplace), i suppose you would call it ‘supper.'"

he led the way to the door, but there he stayed.

"we have no guests to-night," he said, smiling, "so we dine alone.
but may i beg of you to assume a more cheerful countenance? my slaves
are not accustomed to sad looks, except from prisoners, and you are
a guest. also, i must give you a little advice which is sometimes
given in the world we've left to poor relations. look as if you were
accustomed to everything, and don't pay too much deference—‘attention'
rather i should say—to the servants."

then he opened the door, and without there stood a dwarfish creature
bearing somewhat the semblance of a man. he was very, very thin and
little, and very, very old, at least if one was to judge from the
wrinkles on his face, for it was lined with them.

"slave, conduct this spirit to the apartment that has been prepared,"
plucritus said, and the hauteur in his voice matched the pride upon his
face.

"don't talk too much to him," he added more carelessly to me. "he has,
or rather had, a pretty bad habit of repeating things."

walking backward across the polished floor the old slave conducted me
to a broad flight of stairs, which led me to a pillared gallery set
with fine armoury and statues. from thence we passed along a corridor
built in grained marble with doors on each side, and through one of
these we entered into a large apartment set aside for private rest.

i had the advantage, being myself a spirit, of wearing that simple
garment (which is worn by spirits and needs no other ornament) which
you in your world call invisibility. it is that finely-woven mist which
clings like graceful raiment or like bright hazes round the sun.

yet i noticed the old creature was bringing forth from a wardrobe in an
adjoining chamber most gorgeous clothing.

"take it back," i commanded shortly, turning to him. "this is not my
own."

he scarcely seemed to heed me, but went on placing vestment after
vestment in almost luxurious profusion on the bed.

then, losing my temper, for no other reason perhaps than that i was in
hell, i turned to him.

"fool," i said, "do you take me for a harlequin or a beggar, that you
force things upon me that are not my own?"

he understood; at least, he desisted and carried them away.

after that he brought me living water with which to refresh and cleanse
myself from those impurities which, though in a different manner,
affect spirits as well as men.

i was ready to descend long before the summons came, and having nothing
more to do, and not knowing exactly whither to go, i sat down and began
to question my companion.

but i found he was dumb, for on my third question he opened his mouth
and showed the ghastly cavity.

i recognised the spirit of plucritus well in this, for he was scarcely
likely to have left me alone with a servant who could disclose the
slightest information, even untruthfully.

finding therefore nothing of further interest within the room i passed
out into the corridor and made my way to the central gallery.

it ran along the walls above the large hall and i walked through it
slowly, more intent on my own thoughts than the surroundings.

you have felt depression and can understand the feeling that was mine.
it seemed as if the whole great palace hung on me; from ever gloomy
piece of armoury some scarcely-breathed sigh escaped; each marble
figure looked at me with silence-speaking pain. my thoughts ran ever
back to the world i had left; at times i thought of you, and wondered
how you fared, being left alone.

but in the midst of this sad reverie i was aroused by hearing a clear
and penetrating, yet eerie, mournful sound. then i laughed. 'twas but a
gong calling to that meal of which by this time i was much in need.

i retraced my steps toward the staircase, and as i descended i became
aware of the simplicity of the garment which i wore; but being a spirit
i had, or rather had had, the power to change it to whatever form or
kind i chose. but now that power had left me. i remembered with some
haste that scene in the bedchamber, in which the wretched menial had
offered me such sumptuous attire. impatiently, then, i had rejected all
his offers, whether from preoccupation or some other cause, it would
be hard to say. in a marvellously short time, in other places, i could
have transformed the simplicity of plainness into that of beauty, but
now i must either go back for borrowed garments or appear just as i
was. with that independence which has ever been part of my nature i
chose the latter course, and passed down into the hall. there i found
two slaves waiting for me.

and whilst i mention them i may describe them briefly.

in this palace the slaves and menials were countless, and in shape
they were all lean, deformed, wrinkled, and hungry-eyed. they walked
about naked, unable to hide one disproportioned limb or hideous defect,
and ever through the hungry look within their eyes hatred would gleam
and baffled cunning. they alone were in themselves fit subjects for
depression, for spirit-instinct told me that round each form was
wreathed a history of the past, binding like some tight chain.

these led me, with many varied expressions of obeisance, to the large
dining-hall. here there were many tables, but only one was laid, and
this was at the farther end, beside a fireplace.

they were waiting for me—were not yet seated. as i approached they
turned from the conversation in which they were engaged and looked at
me with some interest. but into the eyes of plucritus, as he glanced
over me, there blazed a flash of anger. i noticed it, and the cause,
though the expression was momentary.

"this is our guest," he said, turning from me to her.

"i know," she answered lightly, coming forward. "we are well
acquainted, though he preferred sleep to me. for all that i have never
had your name on good authority, nor indeed at all."

"well," observed plucritus, slowly, "i do not know that you will ever
get his name on good authority, as you call it. he has no name, for the
planet from which he comes does not acknowledge him. but as here, at
least, we are courteous we will give him the name that best suits his
vanity; we will call him genius. vestné, this is genius—genius, here
is my wife."

"i expect," she said, with that half-laughing sigh of hers, "you have
cast a libel on us both."

"not so," he rejoined. "i describe you as my wife to suit his morals.
he has come from earth, you know the place i mean, where they are all
moral on the outside, but underneath they suit their own convenience."

as he spoke he stood behind her and eyed me with the hard, unflinching
stare which was so distasteful. i remember a rather awkward pause
followed on this remark till vestné led the way to the table and sat
down. she had attired herself in the most lovely raiment eye could
wish, and the soft, silken coils about her head were of the beauty of
simplicity.

the meal, though most magnificently served, and delicate in flavour
throughout, was a failure. plucritus, who in hell appeared much
different from what he was on earth, sat like some great prince, moody
and speechless. he wore the usual civic robe above his tunic, but under
this there shone on his arms and neck a fine coat of linked armour,
worked in gold, though hard as steel. he wore neither crown nor coronet
upon his head, and he needed neither. a crown to him was simply a
bauble, unless worn out of courtesy and compliment to those who were
his equals.

i understood well the cause of his ill-humour, and even sympathised
with it. but no remark was passed till the fruit had been brought, and
vestné, who during the meal had tasked me with many questions about the
people on earth, laughingly left us.

when we were alone plucritus continued for some time silent, absorbed
for the most part in cracking and eating nuts. for you will understand
that nuts of certain kinds are a very favourite dessert with
spirits—so much is often contained within a nutshell.

i made no attempt to join him, either in eating or drinking. a glass
of untouched wine stood beside me—what appetite i had, had been long
since satisfied. at last he broke the silence.

"genius," he said in his clear, incisive voice, "would you be kind
enough to tell me something? i wish to know if living among boors has
transformed you into a boor?"

"in all probability," i answered, "or the question would be
unnecessary."

"i see," he commented. and then for a little while silence fell again.

presently he began once more,—

"am i to blame you for this negligent, uncourteous attire, or that
cursed slave i sent with you?"

"i am to blame entirely. he did his best—but failed."

"i see. then i am inclined to blame him. failure is a crime, a
lamentable weakness. he may suffer a little more till he has found out
some means of making you do—right."

his voice as he spoke was filled with cruelty, though towards the end
of the sentence it had sunk so low that he seemed really speaking to
himself.

"in that case," i went on quickly, "i will wear as many clothes as you
care to put on me—always excepting a scrubby singlet. they don't suit
me."

he laughed.

"be careful," he said. "you were once mistaken for a woman dressed in
contravention of the law."

"i know. but i should have thought the better expression would have
been ‘effeminate.'"

"would you have raised no objection to be called ‘effeminate'?" he
questioned.

"none," i answered.

"but deborah does." whereat he laughed again. "since you have gone she
has raised a kind of statue to your memory, and there you sit in lonely
grandeur, for the atmosphere around is ice. of late she has taken to
dragging every man that she has ever met into this gloomy chamber, and
sets them side by side with you."

"and what next?"

"well, there is rather a change in the atmosphere. so some show to
disadvantage. but this comparison always pleases me, because the
comparer gains no pleasure from it, but only bitterness. many a time i
have interfered and have thrown a kind of halo round you, making you
more a god than mortal, so that the bitterness may be more complete."

"do you derive pleasure from this cruelty?"

"yes. i always derive pleasure from cruelty, as you know. the more so
in this case because the writer had laughed at me."

"but—" i began, but he continued,—

"if people laugh at me i laugh at them when the time comes. if they
hold me up to ridicule, i hold them up to ridicule when the time comes.
if they speak untruthfully of me i speak untruthfully of them when the
time comes."

"really," i interposed, yawning, "i never knew before you were so
sensitive."

he laughed. "if i were not so sensitive," he rejoined, "i should be
less powerful. to make others feel one must feel oneself. moreover, to
be mixed up with one's own slaves and menials, to be depicted as a kind
of jack-in-the-box, and described as turning from dark brown to pale
brown, not to speak of other things, rather surprised me."

"come, come, plucritus," i said irritably, "where's the use of all this
acting? one might think something had bitten you and put you out of
temper. surely you are having enough revenge. what more do you want?"

"nothing," he replied moodily. then after a pause he looked up.

"genius," he said, "do you miss your ring?"

"very much," i answered.

"then why don't you buy it back?"

"not having the wherewithal to effect a change in raiment, what funds
do you give me the credit of having in order to redeem jewels?"

"you have the book. you can sell the book to me and regain the ring. it
means freedom, you know."

"is there anything else you would like besides the book?" i asked.

"no," he answered with that long, penetrating stare. "the first book
will be quite sufficient."

"i see," i went on. "and the writer?"

"damn the writer. the book will never go through, so you may as well
sell it to me and start afresh in better company."

"that is your old advice."

"and my only advice. so long as you stay with deborah you are a
failure. you have had signal examples of it in the past. she will never
write another book."

"then if i sell you the book for the ring i may go back whence i came?"

he laughed.

"scarcely so. if you want to be a success, and your life depends upon
it, you must come over to my side and leave her."

"and that means despair following on depression."

"what matter? god's kindness counteracts the devil's cruelty."

"do you know, plucritus, i think i should admire you more if at times
you spoke plainer?"

"how so?"

"well, it would be rather a change to hear you speak the honest truth."

for a minute there was silence, then he got up and leant against the
mantelpiece and looked into the curious burning fire.

"it's a pity," he said, "for you and i were meant to be friends. it's
a pity we should be separated by the squalling of one insignificant
woman."

"it may seem so to you," i rejoined drily and somewhat at random, "but
i had rather be separated from you by a woman, however insignificant,
than joined to you by one however beautiful."

"you are not separated from me," he retorted, his eyes flashing as he
turned toward the table. "you are my prisoner, caught and trapped like
all the rest, and if you enjoy a little more privilege it is simply
because we are waiting the close of events. when the book fails for the
last time she will follow you here, and here you can live, a source of
torture and torment to each other for ever. if you will not bend your
will i have the power to break it, and the only thing that springs from
a broken will is pitiable weakness."

"i can at least wait the close of events," i declared briefly. "and for
the punishment, i doubt not i have strength enough to stand it."

"you talk like all ignorant people, with much assurance," he said
scornfully. "but you must know that here we never punish in proportion
to the fault. we punish to suit our own convenience and pleasure. look
at these wizened, shrivelled slaves that wait on us. think you they
are serving a term of slavery? i tell you they are here unto eternity,
though that little muddled world in which you lived turns its face away
from the inevitable, and pitying its own weakness, talks of the mercy
of god and winks at punishment."

"i think," i observed sharply, repaying scorn for scorn, "you must
descry the sin before you touch the sinner."

"and in case of unfair play," he remarked slowly, leaning his hand upon
the table and smiling across at me, "to whom do you intend to appeal?"

i did not answer, since to this question i knew well there was no
answer. but through the silence that followed a terrible cry rang. it
was the first distinctly human sound i had heard since coming.

plucritus started at the sound, then moved hastily across the room to
where i still sat.

"come with me," he said shortly. and as i rose he placed his hand
within my arm. i remember well the clasp of those iron fingers as he
led the way across the room out into the hall. we passed out by a side
entrance into the palace grounds, and then on to a high balcony at some
short distance.

it was darkest night, and yet the view around was clear as day.

to one side ran the great river, threading its winding course for miles
as far as eye could see. it was very black, and very wide, and very
strong, and the swish of its waters against the heavy reeds was loudly
audible; by now i was beginning to understand the sounds of hell.

the most glorious sight was the great palaces that rose high among the
trees in every direction, their graceful architecture and brilliant
lights, together with the pure marble of the steps and terraces
that led up to them, making a perfect dream of transcendent beauty.
moreover, the heavy foliage of the trees threw the more into relief
their exceeding brilliancy.

then as i listened i could perceive the sound of voices laughing,
talking, and as i watched i saw figures moving on the terraces, till it
seemed the whole scene was filled with life and animation.

below us i recognised the wide avenue along which i had come, and it
was to this avenue that all eyes were bent. just then there came the
same cry which we had heard before, this time nearer.

plucritus laughed softly, and from the neighbouring terraces i heard
one general laugh follow the sound.

presently from a sudden bend in the road dwarfed forms sprang up
on every side. shouting, leaping, making inarticulate cries like
wildly-excited animals, half whine, half scream. they were hideous
and horrible demons whose unrestrained excitement lent that swollen
fulness to their features which was more disfiguring than their
leanness heretofore had been. and in the midst the cause of all this
wild, unbounded joy was the body, or what looked like the body, of a
very lovely woman. it was lying bound stiffly to a funeral car shaped
like a coffin, and all round there shone a clear red light. and on the
one side was printed in letters of gold, "with care—perishable." and
on the other side, "fragile." plucritus read these words and laughed.

"i wonder whose little joke that was," he remarked. "there is a good
deal perishable and a good deal fragile, no doubt, but beyond that
there is a good deal durable and strong."

"is that the soul of a sinful woman?" i asked, as the screaming,
howling procession came along.

"yes. is it not beautiful?" he queried, and there was a twinkle of
merriment in his eyes. "but," he continued, "it is all put on. the soul
has been puffed out and padded and stuffed, and in itself is loathsome.
but we throw a very fine and artificial glamour over it and give it a
semblance of beauty, so that all these little imps are mad with envy,
and spite, and hatred, and long for the day when they shall have sucked
all the juices away and left nothing but the dried-up skeleton of a
spirit behind."

"surely that is impossible," i exclaimed.

he raised his eyebrows quizzically.

"never heard of vampires? it is the nature of spirits; virginius and
his set often more so than us."

by this time the car had reached us and was passing. just as they came
below us the bound figure made a desperate struggle to rise, and gave
once more that terrible cry which we had heard before.

a hundred bony hands strong and cruel pressed forward upon the throat
and lips. others shook their fists, others cursed and swore and called
her every name which they themselves had doubtless been before her. one
old hag rushed forward and struck a cruel blow upon the white breast.

almost immediately a black swollen bruise appeared.

"rotten," cried plucritus, and he laughed. then he repeated, "fragile,
perishable," and laughed again. "look at that hag who struck the blow,"
he continued. "she has an interesting history. she was once more
beautiful than the figure lying there; but that was a very, very long
time ago, for then she was a great queen."

i followed her with interest, almost unable from her appearance to
believe his words. the victim they were bearing along had sunk back,
but her eyes were open, and they expressed all that fear and despair
which go to form the greater part of hell. i watched them pass with an
ever-growing heaviness and oppression at my heart.

"let us go to see the incarceration," he suggested, turning to me.

"i had rather be excused," i answered coldly.

"come," he said, laying hold of my arm again. "they are like animals at
the slaughter-house—they will fly anywhere to get away from the right
door, and tear and scratch all who approach them. this woman, when
she sees the place prepared for her, will fight like a wild animal to
escape."

"and how do you get them in?" i asked, interested despite myself.

"we whip them in," he replied softly. "or rather our slaves do. they
enjoy it, and are never particular when to stop. it is all we can do
at times to call them off. it is their method of welcoming strangers.
come," he added, "let us go."

"no," i repeated. "i have seen enough of this place to last me some
time."

he only laughed.

"come," he said, "you must get accustomed to it. for aught i can tell,
the next may be deborah."

and then with a sudden strength, of which i had judged myself incapable
since coming there, i threw his hand off.

"you doubtless have all power over those who get down here," i
remarked. "but whilst a man or woman is yet on the earth there is still
means of escape."

"very rarely," he commented, smiling. "once let them get the noose
round their necks, and the more they struggle the tighter grows the
knot."

however, because i refused to go he returned with me to the palace.

"you have missed a never-to-be-forgotten sight," he said as he led
the way to the library, where i had first been conducted. "you won't
succeed in journalism if you throw away opportunities like that."

"i shall merely leave the place for others," i replied wearily, for
weariness and dejection were a part of living here, except to those
whose kingdom it was.

"genius," he said as he sat down, "what do you think of my collection
of books?"

"it is very fine," i answered, looking round. "but nothing out of the
way for so great an individuality."

"what more does it need?" he asked as he looked round.

"nothing. and that is where it becomes uninteresting. you have
everything."

"yes," he replied. "and i'm growing sick of it. one of these days i
shall burn more than half the lying rubbish. i don't know why i ever
collected it."

"that would be a pity," i rejoined. "to destroy so much beauty of
thought would be very needless destruction."

"not at all," he observed sharply. "i am going—"

here he was interrupted by the opening of the door, and there entered
several others very similar to him.

"plucritus, why were you not there?" queried the first comer. "it was
an almost more amusing scene than that witnessed at dino's last week.
but you were not here last week. what an age it is since we have seen
you."

"and i am off again within this half-hour," he interjected, looking at
a curious watch he brought from the girdle of his tunic. "but tell me
of this scene, was it much better than usual?"

"well, perhaps not better, but just as good. when—"

"don't use names," said plucritus, hastily, as if he almost interpreted
the other's words. "can't you see i have a guest?"

"no," answered the other, looking round superciliously. "or rather,"
he added, "we met vestné without and she explained that you had here a
beggar dependent on your charity."

"really—" broke in another, and then his tone altered to one of mock
courtesy. "your wardrobe seems somewhat scanty, sir. may i offer you a
change of raiment?"

"this stranger surely has come from earth," interrupted a third.
"that planet which is one of our most fruitful gardens. such a rarity
deserves a golden cage and a public show day."

"why, this is he who wished to make a friend of that cold saint
virginius and failed," put in another.

"thereby proving himself for once not such a saint as he appears,"
laughed a fifth.

"this is the spirit who wrote a book and confounded the devil with
something less powerful than himself," said a sixth.

"ay," sneered a seventh. "and in the same book he confounded men with
women, and women with men in a way which was at times _absolutely
shocking_."

he turned his eyes down at the last words and shook his head. he had
perhaps heard some old lady use the same expression.

"this is the spirit," said another, "who flung down a challenge at the
gate of heaven and expected to escape the fire of hell."

the sudden onslaught would in another place and at another time have
provoked me to some answer, but i felt myself incapable of it. i was
learning still further that every prisoner here simply endures—having
no power, sometimes feeling no wish, to retaliate. this latter was the
case with me. i felt a certain coldness clinging round me which numbed
the sharper edge of feeling, so i sat there apparently indifferent to
their scoffing, and felt inwardly the same.

following this outburst plucritus rose, laughing.

"i must go," he observed. "it is growing late. genius, i must leave
you, but i shall return ere long. till then, think upon my offer of the
ring."

"genius?" cried he who had first spoken, "is this genius?"

"that cannot be," exclaimed another, solemnly. "he has produced nothing
in blank verse."

"it's out of fashion," urged another. "love-letters are all that are
needed nowadays."

"you're getting behind the times," said another, talking at random.
"read the _daily scorcher_."

"is that written in blank verse?"

"oh, no. it's after the same rhythm as ‘mary had a little lamb.'"

"what do you mean? if you cast a slur upon them they will prosecute
you."

"i said nothing detrimental. i simply meant to convey the impression
that they wrote in a popular vein."

"i see. but at that rate you ought to quote the poet-laureate."

there was a silence till someone queried, rather quietly,—

"what's his name?"

"don't know," answered the one who had first spoken. "he hasn't got
one. he doesn't believe in that sort of thing. he leaves it to the lady
novelists who won't have their photo taken."

"what does he believe in?"

"blank verse and popular ballads,
chip potatoes and lettuce salads."

"the two last are very good," said he who had put the question. "the
poet-laureate is undoubtedly a gentleman."

i think in the midst of this random and unceasing talking i must have
fallen asleep, for when i again became conscious of the things around
me i was lying on my bed amid the silence of night. i was experiencing
that misty, unreal sensation which, when accompanied by dejection and
depression, is so terrible to bear.

at times i felt it must simply be a phase, a part of the working of my
own inner spirit, but again i realised that the force acting on me was
external, and that this unreality was simply a more horrible form of
what was real. i lay awake for a long time wrapped in thought, and when
that light born out of darkness which they call "day" had risen i rose
too and prepared to descend to the lower hall.

chapter iii

to have felt anything of the brightness of early morning here was
quite out of the question. the same feeling of utter loneliness and
depression that accompanied me when i fell asleep was with me when
i rose. as i passed down the staircase the sight of those wretched,
wizened dwarfs filled me with more gloomy thought than i had even
entertained the night before.

when i reached the bottom step i saw sitting there that figure of which
plucritus had spoken laughingly as some great queen of the past. she
got up as i stood there, and came and fawned upon me, rubbing against
me like some pet animal.

at the first touch my immediate instinct was to recoil, for never until
near contact could one fully recognise the utter degradation of such a
creature. but along with this feeling came another in consideration of
her past majesty and her lost humanity, and i stood still and received
the caress pretty much as a sentinel on duty would have done. to those
who might have a turn that way there was something distinctly humorous
in this, and so evidently someone thought, for at this instant i
heard a laugh, very clear and mirthful, come from down the hall i had
entered. it was vestné, coming towards us, her hands clasped behind
her, and in that simplest robe which spirits wear. she was evidently
not oppressed with any of the heaviness which hung round me: she looked
more light and brilliant than the night before. her head was thrown
back a little to one side.

"if you knew how comical you looked," she said, with very little malice
but much amusement, "you would really try to appear more at home. this
creature is perfectly harmless—as harmless as she is ugly—that's
saying a great deal. but you drew up as frigidly as if she'd been a
snake, and then seemed to have the wish to unbend but not the power.
now, if you don't like their caresses, and i can sympathise with you,
as i cannot myself tolerate one of them, just kick them off. for my own
part i would not have one of them about the place, but it is a whim of
plucritus. he likes to see them now and then when he comes home, so
they are less confined here than at most of the places round."

"where are they usually kept then?" i inquired.

"oh, they live in the back wings of the palace," she answered. "some of
them are very happy there, and have quite nice little homes. at least,
so plucritus says, but i never trouble to go, it doesn't interest me."

at a table by one of the windows in this large hall breakfast had been
laid. she led the way and i followed, the deformed slave having limped
away on her mistress's approach.

i noticed that here we were being served by two tall footmen in
splendid livery, whereas the night before everything had been removed
and brought by a power corresponding to electricity.

when they had gone i remarked on this to her, and asked why, as such
was the case with two beings, all the rest were not allowed to retain
at least some of this lost and human beauty.

at first she did not answer, but at last she gave some kind of an
explanation.

"well, you see," said she, "it costs a great deal to alter them from
their natural state. these two were sent last night after your arrival
to a friend of ours who is rather clever at transformations. it needs a
thorough knowledge of human nature, and a thorough knowledge of their
past history, before anything really effective can be produced. but
those two are admirable specimens, and as long as they remain in good
condition i have no objection to them."

"may i ask you how the transformation is brought about?"

"perhaps i ought not to tell you," she replied. "but still i will, for
it is so delightful to talk to a complete stranger. let us say those
two men were in their lifetime built up of selfishness. naturally when
they came here they had to be broken into harness, and before that
could be done the selfishness had to be drawn out of them."

here she smiled slightly. "naturally nothing would be left but
spiritual skin and bone, which when put under extreme pressure
contracts and leaves those stunted creatures you have noticed. now this
friend of whom i spoke has a very delightful hobby. he collects small
portions of the essence of all sins, since not even the wealthiest can
afford to buy much, except what comes to them by actual possession, and
stores them away. then if any of us wish to have our slaves transformed
at any time to their original likeness he will do it for us. he builds
them up from what they were originally, selfish, hypocritical,
deceitful, ambitious, whatever it may be. naturally like clings to
like, and so in a master hand the whole is soon built up. but for
every atom of the original sin he introduces five of decay, so that
they cannot last long in that condition, and have to be renewed unless
allowed to return to their former state."

"and do you not prefer to have them in this state than in their naked
ugliness?"

she shook her head and smiled.

"no. we like as far as possible to be fair, and it is impossible to
transform the whole and keep them in good repair, therefore we leave
them as they naturally are. the sight of these two, as it is, will only
provoke the envy and spite of all the rest, so they won't have a happy
time of it after all."

"then why have you transformed them?" i asked.

"plucritus said you liked outward show," she answered. "and moreover,
our friend was in a mood to be cruel, and sent round to know if anyone
had slaves who wanted punishing."

"then does the process entail suffering?"

"of course," she replied. "it could not be done otherwise. i have
a brother who has wealth unbounded, and all his slaves are thus
constructed; but plucritus is somewhat after the nature of a
philanthropist and is rather inclined to spoil than ill-use his
servants as long as they do their work well."

"and if not?" i inquired, interested.

"well, then, i suppose they have a lively time of it. i never
distinctly asked, though. but tell me, what you intend to do to-day?"

"i am quite at a loss. not being either in my own land or on the earth
i am unacquainted with the way the time is spent."

"you may walk through the grounds if you wish. i am at your disposal
and will show you everything of interest."

"i am afraid i am in that mood when very little interests me."

"then will you walk through the picture-galleries? you might find
something of interest there if you care for art."

"i have no particular wish to visit the galleries."

"but you must do something," she laughed. "you'll have to do something.
you can't sit here all day."

"no," i remarked, rising. "i will go through the grounds—but alone, i
need no companion."

"well, you may go alone if you wish it," she declared, "but i will join
you there. solitude is not good for people; it makes them get into a
‘i'll do this,' and ‘i'll do that,' and ‘you're not wanted,' sort of
way, which is very bad for them."

so i went out alone, leaving her to follow when she cared.

it was quite true that the morning light was shining clear and
bright, that the birds were singing and the fountain playing, but it
was simply an unreal dream picture to me. i walked from terrace to
terrace, descended steps and passed through grottoes, looked at the
marvellous fountains and the curious fishes swimming in their basins; i
passed down avenues of trees and flowers of softest shade and sweetest
fragrance, and at last reached a spot where i heard the sound of the
deep dark river. to me there was more reality about this heavy flowing
stream than about anything around. i passed down a steep path that
led to its banks and stood there looking in the inky tide. like all
deep silent things it had the power to keep me deep in thought. i am
not quite sure but that its ever-lapping, flowing waters soothed me,
for there i sat watching it and scanning the waste drear land beyond,
scarcely conscious of anything besides.

i was aroused by vestné calling me from above.

"now i knew if i left you alone," she explained, "you would come to the
most dangerous spot. if you sit here much longer the dregs will poison
you, as the vapour is ever rising."

"i was feeling a much-wished-for restfulness," i observed.

"it is the effects of the poison," she returned. "i must beg of you
to come away. if you are poisoned i shall be held responsible. surely
you will come away, if only to relieve me from the discomfort of that
position."

thereupon i got up ungraciously; this interference seemed to me to be
very uncalled-for.

"if you wish it i will come away, but can you show me another place as
good?"

"i really don't know," she answered. "you have such peculiar tastes.
suppose, instead of moving about, you go to the library and write."

"write what?"

"oh, don't ask me. anything."

"i never wrote a line in my life," i rejoined irritably, turning off
on a path away from her. but if by that i hoped or thought to get rid
of her i was much mistaken. she followed me without speaking the whole
length of a rhododendron walk, and then through a bower twined with
honeysuckle and red roses. at the end of it i turned to her again.

"well?" said i.

"i've hit on an excellent plan," she answered, as if irritation were a
thing unknown to her.

"indeed," i exclaimed. "then like all excellent things it can keep."
and i walked on.

at last we came back again to the long terrace and i began to ascend
the steps, but she ran up them lightly and waited on the top step right
in my path.

"i've thought of an excellent plan," she ventured, when i was still
three steps from her.

"what is it?"

"you and i shall write a play together. i will write it and you can
dictate it. that will be excellent, it will pass the time away."

i smiled. "if i helped you to write it, that would be a sure guarantee
that it would fail."

she shook her head. "not at all," she cried. "when you got too prosy i
would put in a dash of my own position to enliven it."

"then we should get to quarreling," i interposed.

"not we," she said. "i should have the common sense to keep my remarks
to myself."

"i see. and who would act it when written?"

"we would. i don't mean you, but myself and some of my friends. come,
let's go."

but i shook my head.

"i have not the slightest inclination to write plays at the present
moment, nor to dictate them." and i sat down on the steps. after a
minute's hesitation she sat down too.

"i've hit on another plan," she suggested.

"what is it?"

"let us quarrel."

"you may begin; if it seems worth while i will join you."

she got up without speaking, and passing behind me came and sat down by
my side.

i passed no remark, neither did i move. she waited for a little while,
then very quietly she laid her left hand on mine—and there certainly
was cause enough for dispute, since on her middle finger shone my own
ring—the one with which i had sacrificed everything except existence.
i stared at it in surprise and displeasure and then at her.

"who gave you that?"

"i think i must have stolen it," she answered, and still she left her
hand in mine. then as quietly as i could i removed her hand and got up.
she rose also, and into her eyes had flashed all that anger which i had
occasionally seen gleam in the eyes of plucritus.

"why do you not ask me for it?" she said.

"it is not yours to return," i replied.

i remember at this she laughed scornfully and drew the ring from her
finger and looked at it.

"i do not think you will ever wear this again," she went on. "it has
been altered to fit my hand. and though an inexpensive trifle it is a
pretty ornament—which i should not consent to part with."

"since it fits you, you had better wear it," i remarked. "it was lost
fairly, and, as i understand, can only be returned on one condition. as
that condition is an impossibility it is much more yours than mine, and
i may congratulate you upon the rearrangement of the centre setting."

"what was it that ever made you relinquish your right to it?" she asked.

"since you are wearing it you must know," i answered.

"not the entire facts," said she. "now, tell it me as a story and i
will listen carefully."

"i should speak as a prejudiced narrator," i declared. "you had better
ask plucritus."

"but he would speak as a prejudiced narrator too."

"and you would be prejudiced in his favour, so that you would receive
his statement much more readily."

"are the women on earth always prejudiced in favour of their husbands?"

"i do not know. i have never distinctly lived on earth."

"doesn't it agree with you?"

i laughed. "i have not wit enough to grasp the human intellect," i
replied. "i had always complimented myself that there was a great
similarity between the two worlds."

"how old are you?" she queried abruptly.

"alternately as old and young as i appear to be."

"so am i, so are we all," she observed softly. "is not the scene round
here magnificent?"

"yes," i replied. "are those forms on the horizon hills or clouds?"

"they are hills," she said. "beyond the hills lies one of our great
cities. some day you shall go there—it is very interesting. but now
let us return to the house, as i have much to do before the mid-day
meal."

together we went back into the palace, and to the library. there i saw
were many newspapers for the day piled together on the table.

she sat down beside these with pen and ink and paper, and opening the
first at the leading article began to scan the lines. seeing that the
papers really came from the earth i drew nearer.

"what are you doing?" i asked at length, when i had watched her busily
employed in underlining and writing out various statements from each
column.

"i'm copying out all the lies," she answered simply.

"the what?" i asked again.

"the untruths," she said apologetically.

"they seem pretty numerous in to-day's papers," i laughed.

"no indeed," she went on. "there are fewer than usual. no matter
however small the prevarication may be, i can always spot it."

"but what is your pleasure in such an unpleasant task?"

"it is no pleasure—it is business, and needs thorough concentration."

"but considering your people are the instigators of lies, why don't
they send you down the complete list each day? it would save you the
trouble."

she laughed.

"well, you see by the time a lie has passed through the mind of a
man (or a woman for that matter) it has generally undergone certain
modifications, and it is my work to get at the truth, which is, of
course, a lie, in its original form."

"i see. then a pure lie is unadulterated truth?"

"yes. and that is why a real lie is so hard to discover. it is
essentially the truth."

"but why are you so hard upon the newspapers? you do not leave one
paragraph unstudied."

"it is my work," she asserted. "a lie that is allowed to circulate
gains in bulk though it loses in truth."

"what do you mean?" i inquired.

"never ask me what i mean. i talk at random, and if it hits the mark,
so much the better, and if not, well, it is none the worse."

"do you then read these papers purely from a business standpoint?"

"undoubtedly. when i read purely for pleasure i read our own. and these
are dull work after them. they lack the brilliancy, truth, incisiveness
and humour that characterise ours. but there—why do i try to compare
them?"

"yet some of these are very good?"

"oh, yes," she answered with a contemptuous curl of her lips. "and very
good things are like very bad things, very uninteresting."

"you are hard to please."

"not at all, but i like if possible to be pleased in a particular way."

"i see. my only wonder is that since you are undoubtedly interested in
the world you do not take more pains to make your likes and dislikes
known."

"interested in which world?" she questioned.

"earth."

she now got up laughing and came and sat down on a chair by the fire
opposite me.

"i'll leave the papers to-day, they make me melancholy, they are so
very truthful. there's one that says if you want to shake hands with
three duchesses, five countesses, and the very cream of society, you
may do it for three guineas."

"do you call it dear or cheap?"

"dear, monstrously dear. if i were promised cream i should expect
strawberries, but under those conditions i should receive nothing
better than the leaves."

"have you ever shaken hands with a duchess?" i asked by way of keeping
up the conversation.

"why do you smile? once i offered to shake hands with an empress."

"and did she return the compliment?"

"oh, no. the temptation to resist me was too great, so she refused;
consequently she is serving a term of apprenticeship here. at the same
time i offered to shake hands with an emperor, and the temptation
_not_ to resist me was also too great; consequently he is here
too. now if the emperor had behaved like the empress, and the empress
like the emperor, there is no telling where they might have been."

"it takes a very simple sin then to translate a man from earth to
hell," i remarked.

"well, you see, so much lies in a nutshell," she explained. "i remember
when i shook hands with the emperor he forgot to release my hand. i
think he was engaged on matters of state, so it was perhaps excusable.
on that occasion i was wearing a toilet which was a simple creation of
beauty, though made at home and without assistance. i remember my train
was badly torn through his mental aberration."

"but you had the other hand at liberty?"

"well, you see it happened most unfortunately that the grand vizier (i
think it was the grand vizier) had taken possession of my other hand,
and he also was engrossed by state calculations. it would have been a
pity to disturb two such eminent gentlemen from so sacred a reverie,
so i waited, and afterwards they were obliged to pay the cost of the
spoilt robe."

"which, taken from the point of view of the nutshell, was your
reputation."

"not at all. i have no reputation. i am above it."

"and what did your husband say about this extensive handshaking?"

"he never said a word. but i think he was very cut up about the
empress, he thought her so rude. and when she refused to look at
me all the other women did too, and it made me quite low-spirited,
because however much one _likes_ the society of men, one always
_values_ the society of women, especially after they turn nasty.
at last i could stand it no longer, therefore i came home and began to
cry. after a while some of my friends called to see me, and we had the
merriest evening possible, for we sent slaves to collect all the tears
i had dropped on the way from earth to hell, and then we went on to the
highest turret of the palace and threw them back on the earth again."

"indeed."

"yes. and the women who had spurned me gathered them up quickest,
because they looked like glistening diamonds. and now they wear them,
and when they wear them the men fall in love with them, and the women
turn their backs on them, and sometimes they can't understand it, but
it is so."

suddenly her voice changed from the monotone to one of bright and
laughing interest.

"now give me a criticism on my story of shaking hands with royalty,"
she challenged.

"a cool criticism?" i asked.

"if you can," she answered, laughing.

"well, i should say it began with vulgarity and ended with a moral."

"vulgarity?"

"yes."

"but it was a real live emperor. he couldn't be vulgar if he tried. he
never squeezed my hand once."

"well, perhaps it was the introduction of the grand vizier."

"he never squeezed my hand either."

"then perhaps it was yourself."

she got up and drew herself to that graceful height from which she
looked down on most things around her.

"do i look vulgar?" she said.

"no."

"then shall i tell you what formed the vulgarity of which you speak?"

"if you will," i replied.

"it was the atmosphere in which i moved."

"and what was that?"

"humanity."

she went away and left me thinking.

now, when we were seated together at lunch she turned to me suddenly
and said, half laughing, half serious,—

"genius, whom do you consider the greater sufferer—myself or christ?"

"it is a subject i would not discuss," i decided drily.

"you are wise," she affirmed tauntingly. "ignorance should always be
silent."

but to this i gave no answer, and soon she changed the conversation.

from that time onward i remained in the palace, unconscious of the
passage of time, except that day followed day in monotonous routine and
weariness.

vestné was interesting, and at times even gracious. i have known
occasions when she would sacrifice her own inclinations, and even
pleasures, to my convenience. she rarely intruded upon me after the
first day, unless there was reason for it.

if anything, she was more guarded in her conversation, more distant in
her manner, and at times would leave me alone for days together in the
vast palace. on one of these occasions she had asked me if i cared to
join her in going away, but i answered in the negative.

she laughed.

"it may be as well," she remarked. "to speak frankly, i must admit some
of my friends have found rather amusing nick-names for you. it's very
impolite, i know, but you should never have paid such a lengthy visit
in the possession of only one garment."

but press other raiment upon me as they might i always refused it.
never could i bring myself to wear it, however the obsequious, wretched
slave might beg or bow.

i remembered the remark which had been passed by plucritus about his
punishment in case of failure, but even this threat had not the power
to turn me, though it pressed heavily on me every day.

thus the time passed, heavily, wretchedly; i was alone.

never once did i breathe the pure clear atmosphere of hope and light.
in the midst of heartless enemies i walked a stranger, becoming daily
more accustomed to the jeer and scoffs that met me at every turn. the
very slaves eyed me with baffled cunning, hate and greed, longing
doubtless for the day of which their master had spoken, when the last
ray of hope expired on earth. you, deborah, should also have to join
me in this drear abode. and, besides, the dream spirit of unreality
encompassed me about. everything was misty and despondent, even as the
light of day, and earth, and all its shapes, and forms, and joys, and
pleasures are to the broken-hearted.

chapter iv

i remember one afternoon wandering through the grounds alone, hating
my empty existence, yet having no power to alter it, when i was
interrupted by vestné coming to me. in her eyes there gleamed that
curious, brilliant light which characterised them at times, when stung
to answer or excited by some emotion.

she did not speak till near me, and then she said, quickly and
distinctly,—

"genius, i do not think you have yet seen all through my palace.
though you have not asked to do so i cannot think but that you must be
curious. if you will come with me i will show it you now."

with little answer i followed her back to the door from which i had
come out, and we re-entered the palace. hitherto i had only been
acquainted with those principal apartments which led from the large
hall and from each other.

but now she led me to a large folding-door at the upper end, remote
from the end by which i had entered on the day when first i came.

i had often looked towards this door with curiosity. there was a
darkness and mystery about it which had caught even my uncaring
thoughts.

many a time too i had seen a slave pass through it, either in or out,
and in the momentary opening i had noticed the blackness beyond.

i remember as we passed through this heavy door a terrible silence
greeted us, so terrible that whereas without there had been light and
warmth, here one experienced neither. i stood still. a feeling of utter
repugnance overwhelmed me, that feeling of undeniable degradation which
had overwhelmed me when touched by the stunted woman long ago. "i do
not wish to see this place," i cried.

"are you afraid?" she asked scornfully.

"if fear is born of unavailing sorrow then i am much afraid," i
answered.

her laugh broke drearily on the stillness. "you must come," she went
on. "it will do you good and act like a tonic. when we get back again
you will feel quite cheerful, and congratulate yourself upon your
luxurious life as a guest."

i made no further reply.

we had come into a long narrow passage, so gloomy and dark that it
seemed more like the passage through the thick wall of an old church
than anything else.

it appeared dusty and full of cobwebs despite its evident occasional
use, and i remember i coughed once, because there was some irritating
matter in the air.

at the other end of the passage was another door. it was locked, and
i noticed for the first time that she unlocked it before we passed
through; and also from this time i became conscious that she was
carrying a large bunch of keys.

the gloom beyond was greater than it had been before. it was deepened
by a narrow spiral staircase leading sheer down for what might have
been several hundred feet. it was a giddy, gloomy depth, and would
have made dizzy any mortal brain, but we passed down it silently and
swiftly, she leading, i following, till we lighted on firm ground again
amidst total darkness.

where we had come to i could not tell, as the isolation and heaviness
were complete.

"can you hear anything?" she whispered in my ear. and again she
whispered,—

"listen."

yes, i heard it. "gurgle, gurgle." ever the same deep sound—the dull
keynote to hell.

then gradually, slowly and mysteriously, the darkness gave way to a
dull red light. it lit up the arched passages that branched out in
every direction from where we stood, like the crypt of some cathedral.

"they're all buried down here," she whispered again.

gurgle—gurgle—gurgle. there flowed the black stream, turned to
dullest red, along every aisle and dimly-shining passage. no sound of
footfall ever rose among those arches. nothing but the awful lapping
of the stream. she stepped into a boat which was anchored there, and i
followed.

of itself it loosed from mooring and floated silently into the central
channel.

oh, hell! oh, terrible, silent, twisting, twining power of hell!
remorseless cruel power that clings and holds, and never will give way
but by inhuman power! oh, devils! dyed and steeped in cruelty and hate!
luring each willing victim to the brink in hateful silence, till the
last long shriek and counter-laugh are heard! what good can ever rise
from all the torture you inflict? destroying evil with worse evil,
burning out with white heat that which yourselves implanted!

oh, giddy, heedless mortals treading the brilliant path or easy,
unmindful of the gurgling warning stream!

oh! rise! rise! but there—what hope is there to give in hell? it
belongs only to the earth.

such terrible thoughts overfilled me as we sailed along that i
discharged them with a heavy sigh. 'twas strange the way the weird low
sound of misery re-echoed through the vaults. a hundred sighs seemed
raised by it, each breathing to the other its own lone fearful tale,
and then all died away; yet when all died it seemed as if my own still
wandered round unrestful, finding no grave.

"listen," continued vestné, again laying her hand upon my arm as if
to steady me; and indeed it was as well, for at her word there rang
out a cry so terrible and so prolonged that it had almost unnerved me.
the horrid repetition struck chill to the very centre of my being; no
creature writhing under the lash could have ever uttered more fearful
cries. to try to deaden the sound was impossible, till of itself it
weakened and died away with a heavy childish sob of pain. i looked at
her and saw the cruel light in her eyes and the smile on her lips.

hurriedly, and with loathing, i shook off her arm.

"can it be that such sounds please—nay, even amuse you?" i asked
sternly.

she looked at me, the smile playing round her mouth still.

"when the angels in heaven hear those sounds they sigh and tremble. it
spoils their gladdest concert," she said.

no further cry ensued, and our boat sailed along. i noticed that at
intervals, and under each arch, a doorway was visible, and on each
doorway a number was written in clear red. one imagined the cells
beyond even without a glimpse.

at last she stayed before one.

"i shall not take you into all, it would be too tedious," she said. "we
shall visit one or two, and that will suffice."

"you must know," she continued in a clear, hard voice, "that a strict
account is kept of the life of every man and woman upon the earth. we
allow nothing to pass, every ill thought, every ill word, every ill
deed, are all entered faithfully and truthfully. every particular sin
has its particular punishment, and as near as possible we destroy like
with like."

"and," said i, gazing round the terrible gloomy place, "are you always
perfectly fair and just in your punishments?"

"always," she answered, "we want them to do our work, and we punish
them just sufficiently to make them do our work well."

"but," i rejoined, "they have done your work on earth and received no
punishment for that."

"no, rather they received reward. but here we take away that which has
been given them and appropriate it within ourselves. the processes
which we employ are bound to be severe, because, as you know, of
themselves they will give up nothing, or rather very little."

"but surely," i observed, "when they see what suffering they are going
through they will give up all."

"too late," she whispered softly in my ear, and even as that heavy sigh
had travelled through the arches, so these words, the saddest perhaps
that human tongue has ever framed, rang through them too. it seemed as
if a thousand voices from every cell whispered the words, so that one
loud and unavailing lamentation became the universal atmosphere.

she unlocked the door before which we had stopped, but instead of the
cell which i expected a long narrow passage ran both left and right.

door followed door the whole length down, and the numbers on them
corresponded to those on the outward wall.

the darkness here would have been quite intense had not my guide
carried in her hand a clear light, which pierced the gloom for some
considerable distance.

we walked along the passage for a little time, she leading, i
following, till at last she stopped before a cell, and selecting a key
placed it in the lock. before turning it she extinguished the light
she carried and left us in total darkness. slowly, mysteriously and
silently the door swung back and we passed in, and then it closed
behind us. we had passed from darkness into darkness, but gradually the
faintest light began to creep above the cell. it was so faint that till
the eye became accustomed to it nothing was in the least discernible,
and even then at times the heavy shadow fell again, eclipsing all
things as gradually as it had cleared away. and now, huddled in the
corner, i perceived a form, and as i looked intently i recognised a
woman crouching there.

at first i do not think she noticed us, perhaps throughout she scarcely
understood that anyone was there. her hair, which was grey and
dishevelled, hung over her bare shoulders and her forehead, uncared for
and unkempt. she was lean and ghastly, and her thin fingers clasped
each other round her bony knees, from which position she never moved.
her eyes were fixed on the floor in a steady yet unconscious gaze.

"if she doesn't move before long i'll poke her," said vestné. "we can't
wait here all day."

but the sound must have partly attracted her. she looked up, and
instead of looking at the speaker her eyes fell on me.

such a look of dull despair and misery i had never seen before. it
seemed to blind her very sight and deaden all objects but itself.
then she sighed, and the spirit beside me laughed softly. the shadow
deepened round her, and the flimsy light passed on along the wall till
it came to a rude altar having a crucifix above it. i looked at the
plain cross and noticed that the light played round it curiously. and
at last out of this light i formed a figure hanging there. it was the
woman lying in the corner whose cell this was. helplessly, painfully,
she hung there, her eyes still dully bent on the ground. then the
shadow fell once more, and all was left in dreary darkness, and when
next i breathed we were out in the passage once again.

"they are fulfilling the behest of christ," declared vestné, idly.
"they are taking up the cross." and yet it seemed as if among the roofs
and rafters there still floated the old wild cry, "too late—too late."

"this is the women's ward," she remarked as we passed along. "i never
visit the men. plucritus can take you there if you wish to go. but
being, as they say you are, simply a woman dressed as a man, i have no
compunction in bringing you here at all."

again the light she held had vanished.

once more we stood within a cell, and the same pale flickering light
that haunted it was playing on the wall. another woman lay crouching
on the damp floor, and as the light fell on her it seemed as if she
tried to catch it with her hand. unlike the other she was never still.
lying there when we entered, in half a second she was up, walking with
uncertain, faltering steps some little distance, then returning. she
pressed her hands against the wall, beating against it feebly as if
trying to get away. next she moved towards the plain-cut altar and
passed her hands over it aimlessly, as if trying to find something in
the concealing gloom. then back she came to the corner where she had
first lain and threw herself on her knees.

"i'll find it sometime," she cried in a clear monotone. "but the night
is so long and my dream so dark. what follows night? the next night,
and yet it seems there's something missed out that comes between."

the pale light flickered to the crucifix. i saw her lying there; each
sharp, uncertain movement was translated into a painful writhe.

from thence we passed out to another cell, and the faint light showed
us the floor all covered with gold and silver coins, mostly gold. in
the middle, surrounded by all this tarnished wealth, a woman knelt
huddled up in a small clear space, the money heaped up around her.
every now and again a pile would slip and fall towards her. and from
the place where it had fallen a serpent's head appeared, stretching
in her direction with open jaws and cruel tongue. then she would jump
up and fly across the narrow cell, screaming in hideous terror, and
throw herself upon the altar as if for protection. and the coins leapt
up like cruel fire about her feet as she fled, and the great serpent,
with its golden, hardened scales, followed her with fearful hiss, with
forked tongue and leaping fire all round it. neither was the altar any
protection from fire or poison, and being immortal she could never die,
so that she must suffer her term of punishment in an endurance much
worse than death.

then i noticed the light fell upon the crucifix, and looking up i saw
the woman's form lashed to it, not by nails, but by the serpents'
coils, which this surface wealth had fostered and engendered.

at last we moved away and vestné, when we gained the corridor, turned
to me.

"that woman has a curious but very common history," she said. "she
believed that charity covered a multitude of sins."

vestné laughed and passed along.

from thence we went to another cell, and entering, i saw a woman
standing in the middle of the floor. her eyes were filled with the wild
gleam which we on earth call madness. when she saw us she shrank back
terrified into the farther corner of the cell. her breath came in thick
gasps, and still she stared at us like some wild creature brought to
bay.

suddenly she flew across the room and caught my arm in her two hands.
they were at burning heat.

"take me away," she whispered in a voice half-strangled with fear.
"take me away; it keeps coming, coming, coming, and then will touch me.
oh! take me away with you and i will give you everything i have."

"what is there to fear?" i asked.

"look," she said, and pointed on the wall to where the light shone. i
saw nothing.

"it is simply the reflection of her own memory," vestné affirmed
calmly. "she stole another woman's husband and thought to escape
punishment."

"i couldn't help it," the wretched victim interposed, for she had sense
enough to hear the words. "i never knew she'd come to ask for him down
here. i can't escape down here; the walls are thick, the doors are
barred, and turn which way i will i can't get out. oh, god! oh, god!"

"you're quite safe," said vestné. "she died of a broken heart long
since. try to remember that, and think you're suffering from a dream."

"she didn't die. no, no. she never died. and here she haunts me, and
there she haunts him too; and oftentimes she clutches at my breast with
her strong fingers, and some day she will tear my heart away and suck
my life blood. oh! if you have any mercy take me home."

but even as she spoke her voice and hands had lost their power and she
fell backwards.

"she had no mercy herself, yet would solicit yours. she is not yet
cured," my companion remarked.

the light flickered on the wall beside the crucifix, and stretched upon
it i saw the woman's figure; but as i looked i saw the crucifix had
turned from wood into the shape of a man, and the woman hung upon his
body, nailed to it as if it had been lifeless wood.

we went away and there was utter silence in the cell.

from there vestné guided me into a low, darkened chamber, rather
different in shape from the others i had seen. a long low table stood
in the midst, and instead of the pale light which flickered through
the other dreary cells strange, curious flames and darts of fire
floated and danced from side to side.

i cannot tell whether it was owing to the lurid, unreal glare these
lights cast, but the ghastly sight that met us horrified me more than
any i had seen yet.

there on the table lay the form of the woman i had watched drawn
thither when i was with plucritus.

she lay insensible, and it was well, since about her crowded many
fearful demons, and they were all gnawing the flesh away, or rather, to
those who can understand it better, the spirit.

their hideous, hungry, cruel faces lost nothing by the glaring lights
that shone upon them as they floated past. from beneath came strains of
weird, inhuman music.

i understood more clearly now the meaning of these terrible things. so
intent were they upon their prey that they never noticed us.

"this is the vampire's feast," said vestné, turning to me.

"do they absorb the whole?" i asked.

"oh, no. they are only allowed those parts which are of no use to us.
when she is in a fit condition she will be placed in a common cell
to suffer the just punishment. it is really a term of refinement and
purification; after that she will be fit food for us, and servant too."

i said nothing, but watched the hideous creatures at their meal. on
the whole they interfered little with each other, still now and then
a savage growl would break out when one usurped, even in the least,
another's portion.

"they should do good work after this," said vestné. "they have been
feeding here for days. come away, they are not very beautiful to behold
even at the best of times." so we went out again.

"you have locked the door?" i asked.

"oh, yes. they can get out without keys, all except the prisoner."

and from thence we passed on to another cell, in which we found another
woman. what struck me most about her was her beauty. thin and gaunt she
might be (so were they all), but despite all this hers was a beauty of
a very unusual order.

i remember when the door was opened she was standing there as if
listening for something. when she saw us she came forward courteously.

"take me away from here," she exclaimed. "i've never been accustomed to
it. it is dark and damp. i do not like it. take me away."

i was surprised at the quiet way in which she spoke, it was so unlike
the rest whom we had visited.

"you must have patience," vestné declared. "you will get out safely
enough when the time comes."

i noticed, for i was looking at her closely, that at this her lips
trembled, but still she answered, with no very apparent change in her
voice,—

"i've been patient for a very long time, longer than anybody knows.
please take me away."

"it is impossible," vestné assured her.

she now turned to me.

"sir," she said, "i am suffering. take me away."

i looked at her, but, beyond the sympathy i felt, knew i was powerless.

then she began again and passed her hand across her brow. "take me
away. once when i asked for things they were always given me, but now
no one listens or understands. i want to go away. take me away."

"is this place so very fearful?" i ventured, looking round the cold,
bare cell.

her voice sank to a whisper. "i think i have bad dreams. and then i
wake, and lie and wait for the day to break. but it never breaks. the
night never ends, and the darkness is suffocating me. you don't know
what it is, you've never lived in here. no one ever comes near me
except when it is very dark. and then men and women come and curse me,
and say that i have ruined them. but i think that can only be a dream,
for they have ruined me. take me away. oh! stranger, take me away."

i turned towards the door. gradually she was losing that unusual
self-control which had marked her when first we entered.

as i moved she clutched my arm. "i will come with you," she cried
hoarsely. "look! look! they press upon me like spectres from every
side. i am frightened of them; they are killing me inch by inch.
sometimes i scream in terror, and they laugh. oh, god! god! god! what
have i done that i should be tormented thus?"

even as she spoke her voice died down and her strength failed. she fell
back upon the floor.

and then upon the crucifix the form lay hanging. and beneath it stood a
group of men and women watching her.

"those men loved, the women hated her," said vestné. "and now hate and
love have joined hands, for hate lived when love was dead."

we went out in silence.

"i will show you only one more," she said, "and then we will go, as
i am invited out to dinner to-night and cannot stay long. we are now
going to a cell which will make you feel more cheerful. it is the cell
of one who has learnt to stand punishment and has therefore finished
with it."

she took me to a cell at some little distance. a deathly silence filled
the room as we entered, and a deathly chill pervaded everything. the
flickering light passed direct from the wall to the altar, and there
upon it lay the cross, and on the cross another victim.

we drew nearer and gazed upon the dead. such beauty as rested on her
features seemed to refine the chamber.

"will this fair creature change to a stunted dwarf?" i inquired.

vestné shook her head.

"sometimes you ask too much," she replied. "she has learnt by some
trickery to stand the punishment quietly. but that is the more profit
to us. we absorb all this beauty; it belongs to us; then she may go
back again, naked and unprotected as a new-born soul, into the world."

i stooped and kissed the cold brow.

"death is infectious," said vestné, laughing.

"so may life be," i retorted.

after that we left the hateful prisons and returned to the watery
vaults and to our boat.

we stepped in in silence, and she directed it back to the place whence
we had started.

and under the central arch, as we stood gazing backward, i saw these
words shining forth in vivid red against the blackness: "where the fire
is not quenched and the worm dieth not."

"you will have noticed a quotation from christ's preaching down there,"
she said as we ascended the staircase. "he was rather a wonderful kind
of man. he managed to hit so exquisitely upon the truth, even in his
lesser sayings."

"did you admire him?" i asked, struck by a vein of seriousness that
underran her words.

she looked at me rather curiously.

"as men go he was very fascinating," she answered, but said no more.

when we were once more back in that part of the palace which was her
dwelling-house she left me in the hall and i ascended to my own chamber.

once in there alone i threw myself upon the bed and tried to think and
realise. it was no use. i started up and began to walk about the room.
the pain and heaviness gradually sinking round me appeared to become
greater than i could bear. the horrible scenes i had witnessed still
flashed before my eyes in all their terrible truth and dull despair.
i vividly recalled the wild and unavailing cry of all these creatures
for their lost liberty. i recognised their fearful madness—steeped in
sanity so deep, that to call it madness would be a pitiable lie. again
i recognised the misty unreality that haunted them as well as me; the
ghostly lights, the shadowy crucifixes all came back to me, seeming
unreal, almost absurd. was this vast palace but a shadow? those demons
shadows? those prisoners shadows? was vestné a shadow? was i a shadow?

"i am dreaming, surely, i am dreaming," i said to myself, and then the
words of the woman occurred to me. they also had thought themselves
dreaming in endless night.

suddenly i looked round the vast apartment.

was i myself a prisoner, caged in a darkened cell, tormented with a
haunting, flitting light, and dreaming myself within a gilded palace?

i went from one thing to another, touching it; and everything was real
and responded to my touch. i walked the whole long length of the room,
i was in no cell. i felt the steady light within the room. it was no
passing flicker, no dying gleam. then, unable to remain within, i went
out and down the staircase. slowly i walked back and forwards through
the long hall, fighting the grimmest fight that spirits have to fight,
that of retaining clear existence. how long i walked thus i cannot
tell, but when i roused myself i found that night had fallen and the
lights shone from the roof. looking towards the staircase i saw vestné
descending.

she was dressed more beautifully than i had ever seen her, and looked
more brilliant than ever before.

"i am sorry you cannot come with me, i like company," she murmured.

"i am sorry too," i rejoined.

"if you care to wear a decent suit you may come," she went on.

i glanced at the simple robe i was wearing. "thank you," i replied. "so
long as i stay here this shall suffice me. it is my own, and that is
everything."

"but this is a very brilliant entertainment to which i am going
to-night. come."

"i think," i observed, "you have shown me enough for one day. you will
excuse me."

at this she left me, and i sat down and tried to read. i had taken
milton's _paradise lost_, but somehow or other to-night it struck
me as the most tawdry, unreal thing i ever read. the beauty of its
diction, the stately flow of language, the marvellous knowledge of
the writer on all points except one, irritated rather than soothed
me. despite this i still continued reading, till, more than usually
irritated with his appreciation of the godhead, i flung the book down,
laughing involuntarily.

what was my surprise on looking up to see plucritus standing at some
little distance watching me.

on seeing him i felt the nearest approach to pleasure this place gives,
and rose, extending my hand to him.

i remember he looked somewhat surprised, as indeed he well might under
the circumstances, but he returned my salutation pleasantly and came
and sat down near me.

chapter v

"i quite forgot," said he, giving me no time to put a question, "i
quite forgot to borrow a needle and thread whilst on the earth.
probably you yourself have learnt the art of mending."

"well," i replied, "i am not yet reduced to tatters, though i possess
but one garment."

"where is vestné?" he continued.

"she has gone to take part in some theatricals, i think."

"where?"

"do not ask me. your relatives and friends are legion, and quite beyond
my understanding."

"have you seen many of them?" he asked.

"very few."

"then you have still no friend but vestné?"

i laughed.

"i was not aware that she was my friend."

"but," said he, whimsically, "vestné is very charming."

"maybe, to those who understand her—i do not."

"and yet she moves on far straighter lines than the women on earth."

"that may be again. but here the straight lines and the crooked are so
intertwined one cannot distinguish either."

he shook his head.

"genius," he remarked, "you are looking ill."

"then send me a doctor, or prescribe some medicine."

"do you think you could possibly prescribe for yourself?" he queried.

"by all means. i need change of scene—to be more exact, change of
surroundings."

"and where would you go in such a case?"

"back to my own land."

"the earth?"

"i hardly think so."

the faintest smile crossed his lips.

"you are ready at last to forsake your charge for freedom?"

"not at all," i said. "i never yet forsook anything that really
belonged to me."

"you are as faithful as a dog," he laughed. "another womanly
characteristic."

to this i made no answer.

"why do you not answer?" he broke in at length. "i think you are
growing dull."

"i had better be dull than coarse," i replied.

"would your answer necessitate coarseness?"

"perhaps not. but i am looking farther than my answer, to your reply."

"my replies are never coarse, unless badly translated."

"then you should employ a good interpreter."

"it is impossible to find one. as you know yourself, there is not a
more maligned spirit in existence than i."

"how is the book going on?" i asked, interrupting him suddenly.

"what book? oh, yours. well, it has kept me laughing for the last six
months."

"indeed."

"yes. i never believed before that any woman could be such a complete
fool, and my experience has been pretty great."

"one fool makes many," i commented.

"well, perhaps so," he went on thoughtfully. "and the more the merrier.
but tell me, what have you been doing of late? i have left you here
long enough to become well acquainted with the place."

"i have done absolutely nothing except live a profitless existence."

"then you have done as much as most people do, but they thrive on it as
a rule, and you, as i say, look ill."

"this afternoon we visited some of your prisons."

"were they in good order?"

"oh, excellent! but such a gloomy foundation has on the whole rather a
dispiriting effect."

"it depends on the principle," he observed gravely.

"oh! all things depend on that," i said.

"which did you visit?" he asked.

"i was taken to see some women, who, had they been on the earth, would
have been termed mad."

he gave me a sharp sidelong glance.

"perhaps they were mad," he surmised.

"i think not. with all the appearance of madness they were sane. saner
than they ever were on earth."

"come, come, that is putting it rather strongly."

"i think not. they had been brought to recognise their sin."

"yes. but that is the only thing they recognised. they ought to
cultivate a broader mind."

i looked across at him.

"plucritus," said i, "if you were placed in a cell ten feet high and
fifteen square, would you yourself find much room for cultivation of
anything?"

for one moment his lips came together in a thin, cruel line, then he
got up, laughing, stretching out his arms as if tired of the discussion.

"if i were placed in a cell of the dimensions you mention i should
burst the walls, even though they were of iron."

i looked at him as he began walking back and forwards through the room
and did not doubt the strength of which he spoke.

then suddenly he lighted on the _paradise lost_ which i had thrown
away.

"have you been reading that rot?" he asked carelessly.

"well, yes, and i've fallen into the error common to all people."

"that of liking satan best," he joined in, laughing.

"decidedly. but at every other line i find myself stopping to consider
how a man of such ability as milton could ever come to be so deluded in
his ideas of god."

"he was like solomon. his wives led away his heart. three such were
far too many for an ascetic. they helped to turn his brain. yet it is
strange," he continued, smiling, "that he should come to form such a
fine conception of the devil and underrate the godhead."

"he was prejudiced in his favour," i replied.

"the devil's favour?"

"no. the godhead's."

"i see. it's a bad thing to be prejudiced—it can get one into hobbles.
are you sleepy?"

"by no means."

"then suppose you come with me. we can spend the night in visiting some
prisoners, for, like all my visits, this is of short duration."

now visiting prisoners was of all things least pleasant to me. i
remembered my terrible experience of the afternoon and also its
results on myself. moreover, i knew that i should find no relaxation
afterwards from the misery it engendered. but i had no excuse beyond
my own personal feelings, and such things were unrecognised here, so
i followed him with a grim, stony feeling rising within me, caused by
solitude and imprisonment.

he passed his arm through mine.

"it is really quite a pleasure to meet you once more," he declared as
we went towards the gloomy doorway. "because though you may not think
it, i miss you greatly on the earth."

"can you find no one to fill my place?" i suggested drily.

"no one. absolutely no one. i look round and invite people in, but they
won't come."

"have you the right of invitation?"

"no. but i take it."

"then they see through the deception."

"fiddlesticks! they're as blind as milton."

we were now in the passage leading from the doorway to the cells. but
i noticed when we came to the end of it a low doorway which had before
escaped me.

plucritus opened it and we walked out into the moonlight. never before
had i been so impressed by the beauty of these grounds. chilly winter
moonlight it was, which brought with it a certain peace and quietness,
even to me.

we strolled along from path to path, and all was solitude and shadow as
we went. at last we came to a bridge which spanned a large expanse of
water. i had noticed this bridge before, and had often stood upon it,
but in the middle was an iron gate, which had been always locked.

vestné had told me this water separated their estate from that of a
neighbouring kinsman, and i had seen that the grounds beyond were very
similar, as were also the spires and turrets which i at times perceived
among the trees.

plucritus opened the gate easily, and when we had gone through shut it
carefully.

"these are the grounds of a near relative and friend of mine," he
explained. "when we planned our houses we arranged our dungeons so that
he should take one class of prisoners and i the other. we have passages
leading underground, very beautifully decorated, but i thought we would
come as we have done, because this is a scene and a time i like."

similar terraces led us to the palace, and as we drew near we heard
sounds of revelry and music coming from its lighted halls. many doors
and windows stood wide open, so that we could clearly hear the noise
within.

"now look here," said i, standing at the bottom of a flight of steps.
"i hope you still remember my apparel. if i go in there in this state
i must be given a few minutes first in which to prepare myself for an
all-round onslaught."

plucritus stood still and laughed.

"you're a confounded nuisance," cried he. "i would say a ‘damned'
nuisance, but the critics would pronounce me ‘forcibly feeble.'"

"beware of the critics," i advised. "they are like children sitting in
the market-place."

"how so?"

"they are never right. nothing pleases them."

"you never tried them with butter and sugar mixed."

"indeed i did."

"no, you introduced vinegar."

"pardon me, vinegar is the correct thing. it is good for the chest."

"it isn't a case of what's _good_ for them. it's what they
_like_."

"i see. but certainly butter and sugar and vinegar are the correct
thing."

"offer them sackcloth."

"indeed, i have done so, and fine linen into the bargain."

"well?"

"oh, well, they returned the linen with thanks, mistaking it for
calico, and the sackcloth they sent back with rude remarks."

"did they mistake it for anything?"

"yes. i believe they thought the rude remarks were clever ones. but
that is pardonable. it is often difficult to ascend to sackcloth, even
when one can descend to ermine."

"well, let us go together. you will notice i have accommodated my
raiment to yours."

"you still wear armour," i went on, looking at the simple robe he now
wore.

"it is impossible to get rid of it at so short a notice, but it is
unseen. come."

and so we came to the entrance. this place perhaps belongs to the
brother of whom vestné had spoken, for many servants in rich livery
thronged the halls, which otherwise just now were empty.

"come along," said plucritus. "it's all i can do to keep my face
straight passing through here, there's so much mockery and unreal sham
about it."

"cruelty and humiliation," i criticised.

"now, don't preach, genius. considering i have had the kindness to
descend to your level in the matter of dress, you might descend to mine
in the matter of feeling."

"you must know," he continued, "that my kinsman has a very fine theatre
here, which it has cost years to build. it has been constructed on the
latest and most approved methods, and is at the height of comfort,
convenience and luxury."

"i can quite believe you," i affirmed.

"my kinsman is very fond of acting, so are we all. only we never act a
play more than once of twice. after that we leave it to be studied and
rehearsed by our slaves, and they eventually carry it to the earth and
let mortals make what use of it they can."

"then," said i, "according to your version the stage is damned prior to
the outset."

"be careful," he rejoined. "if you use bad language they'll turn you
out.... it is prohibited along with smoking and drinking."

the sounds of music led us to the theatre of which he spoke. it was
fitted up to the greatest perfection, and evidently for private
audiences.

as we entered there was the general buzz which usually accompanies the
orchestra before the curtain rises, but almost immediately after there
was silence, and the lights were centred only on the stage behind the
rising curtain.

the scene that followed was one of great beauty, and the play itself
clever and brilliant, often amusing. i discovered that vestné took the
leading part, though it was some time before i recognised her.

when the curtain fell i waited with interest for the next act, but
it never came. i found out later that they rarely gave more than one
act each night; the rest of the time was left for what they termed
"varieties."

but if i had been asked to translate the word "varieties," i should
certainly have rendered it as "tragedies," since to me they were most
painful.

plucritus had gone near the front and sat down, beckoning me to a seat
next him.

there were many sitting there besides ourselves, a brilliant company
both as to beauty and display.

"now watch carefully," said plucritus, leaning back. "you may learn
something, and you may be interested. but do not go to the absurd
length of tears like deborah when she went to see ‘the only way.'"

"i will endeavour to restrain myself," i declared. "the sight of your
cheerful countenance will act as an antidote, i have no doubt."

just then there walked on the boards a woman. she was dressed very
simply, even prettily, which struck me as being a great concession. no
sound of applause greeted her, but she came to the front and prepared
to sing. i noticed that vestné was prepared to accompany the song,
which appeared to me a most condescending kindness on her part.

she played a few bars and the song began.

it was one of the most beautiful i had ever heard, and contained human
pathos, sadness, and at times even mirth. besides, she rendered it with
beautiful expression, such as could only come from one whose whole soul
was in the work. i waited till the end, and then after the first spell
had passed i looked round, expecting the applause which never came.
she stood still too, probably expecting the same thing. but at last,
amidst the indifferent silence, someone called out, "that was insipid,
and every other note was wrong." hereupon followed a chorus of laughing
assent, and among the general hubbub she withdrew.

i gazed about with an indignation i found it hard to restrain, till
at last my eyes lighted on plucritus. he was sitting watching me, an
amused smile on his face.

"why don't you get up and say ‘it's a lie'?" he whispered.

"i believe," said i, "the only reason is that i lack moral courage. it
can be nothing else." whereat he burst out laughing, and one or two of
those near us turned to see who it was.

"you there, plucritus? why do you laugh?" called one.

"oh! i have a very amusing companion, who says the lady should be
recalled and asked to sing again."

"yes, we have sent to ask her. one trial does not make a complete
failure."

gradually there was silence, and in the midst of it the singer
returned. i do not think she recognised anything about her. her whole
mind seemed bent upon her task; she scarce appeared to recognise her
previous failure, except perhaps in the first line, when for one second
her voice seemed about to break.

the song was different from the other. it was extremely simple, and
whatever beauty it contained was derived from its simplicity. in the
last lines i noticed again that her voice trembled, and silence fell
once more.

presently there came another voice from another part of the room,
"utterly absurd!" and another, "i had hardly the patience to listen to
the end!" and another, "does this creature imagine our understanding to
be no higher than her own?"

amid this laughter and these taunts she withdrew again. but not for
long. i think they must have sent again for her, because she soon
returned. and this time i could tell the laughter and contempt had had
effect.

she sang again, and every line was steeped in a bitter and absorbing
passion. whether there was any beauty in it i could hardly say. at the
end, however, she was met with stony silence; none took the trouble to
make the slightest observation. suddenly the orchestra struck up some
wonderful soft dance music, and with a step as light as foam on water
she tripped off the stage. at this they clapped and laughed.

"she missed her vocation. she should have been a ballet girl,"
plucritus said to me. then he rose quickly. "come with me," he went
on, "i had nearly forgotten i brought you here as an observer; come
quickly."

i remember we went out at a door on the side near the stage. it led
down a lighted corridor which was empty and rather cold. from this we
went down a darker passage with one light burning at the end, and
along the passage were low doors at frequent intervals.

he stopped before one of these and opened it and went in, i following.
the door closed behind us, and i found we were in a cell very similar
to those i had visited earlier with vestné.

the same ghostly light flickered along the wall and shone beside the
altar. the woman who had sung knelt beside it, her arms stretched
across it, her face buried against the hard board.

"come away," i whispered to him.

"no. she's too far gone to notice us much. we will stay awhile."

i noticed that on her shoulder a blue bruise had risen, and i wondered
how she had come by it. after a while she got up and began walking
very, very slowly about the cell, and every now and again she drew her
hand across her brow as if trying to move something away.

at last she noticed us standing there, but whether she ever realised
that we were other than forms conjured by her imagination i cannot tell.

she pressed both hands to her side and her breath came in thick gasps.

"i've been asleep," she whispered, "and i dreamt. yes, it was all a
dream. but it keeps coming, coming, and will not go."

she shuddered.

"when shall i awake?" she cried piteously. "when shall i learn the
truth? when will the day come? they say i can't do it," she went on,
whispering again; "and they always say the same."

"well, perhaps you can't," suggested plucritus, softly. "you have never
succeeded yet, as you know."

she looked across and moved towards him.

"don't say that," she still whispered with a half-choking sob.

"you must try again," he urged.

"sir, is it easy to try again?"

"i don't know," he answered indifferently. "you seem to have a gift
that way, therefore it must be."

"i don't know either," she murmured wearily.

"give it up," he insinuated. "seeing that you can't do it, it is the
only sensible course left."

"i _can_ do it, you fool!" she cried impetuously. "i can, i
can—or rather i could." and her voice dropped again, and from walking
about she had come to a dead stand.

"how did you come by that bruise?" i asked, longing to get away, and
hoping at least to change the conversation.

"i—someone struck at me as i came away," she replied. "and yet i don't
know why—i did my best, and never meant to offend anyone. but it was
all a dream—a horrible dream. everything was upside down."

and then she left us, and stumbled back to the altar, and burst into
such a horrible fit of sobbing as i had never heard before.

"we'll go now," said plucritus.

when we were outside he laughed.

"that is one of my favourite—patients," he said.

"and cruelty is your favourite medicine," i sneered.

"i have known the day when you yourself were cruel," he broke in.

"never, except under extreme provocation—and in a just cause."

he shrugged his shoulders.

"each excuses his own actions," he remarked, and by this we were back
again in the theatre.

there was a great deal of noise going on, and someone called as we
entered, in an exquisitely clear and modulated voice,—

"statesman number three from the left-hand corridor wanted."

a silence followed this, and at last from the left wing of the stage a
gentleman appeared. so far as i knew i had never seen him before, and
plucritus, who sat beside me, explained that he had lived a hundred
years ago, when the great european war was in progress.

the one who had called for him sat in the centre of the theatre, and
round him were grouped many spirits, vestné being at his right hand.

"that is my brother-in-law," said plucritus, "and we really get on
excellently well. some day i will introduce you to him, and there is no
doubt you will form a great admiration for each other."

"we will leave the future to speak for itself," i observed drily.

"my brother-in-law is very talented," continued he; "but he is of such
a modest nature that he has never yet allowed himself to be called by
the name of genius."

"indeed!" i laughed. "what is his particular gift?"

"he has none in particular. they all belong to him."

i laughed again.

we were interrupted by his calling to us.

"plucritus," he exclaimed, "you might at least have the kindness to
keep that conversation at a lower pitch."

"i was describing your character to a friend."

"a friend?" he queried, looking round; and then rather unexpectedly he
left his seat and came to us.

there were two things that impressed me about him—the extreme
sweetness and yet hardness of his face. in some ways he appeared no
older than a youth not yet turned twenty, in others he resembled a man
hardened beyond even the degree to which men can attain.

"you are genius?" he remarked lightly, and i noticed that his voice
corresponded to his face. "vestné says you are dull over there for lack
of company; you should visit me, i am never dull."

"this is vestasian," said plucritus, "who, to quote my favourite
earthly poet, dryden, is—

‘a man so various that he seems to be,
not one but all mankind's epitome.'"

"look at that man over there," interposed vestasian, gazing towards the
stage. "he comes in aptly for the second part of the quotation:—

‘stiff in opinions, always in the wrong,
all things by starts and nothing long.'"

"genius himself can fill up the third part of the text," put in
plucritus:—

"‘for in the course of one revolving moon
he's statesman, chemist, fiddler and buffoon.'"

"dryden is honoured," said vestasian and that sweet, even voice of his.
"but then he deserves it. but, genius," he continued, "you must come
with me—the greatest stranger and the honoured guest."

"what am i to do?" queried plucritus.

"find someone else," returned the other.

for a second they looked at one another, and plucritus turned to me.

"i find i shall not be able to stay very much longer. when i go, will
you return with me or stay here?"

"just as you like," i answered. "either place is as acceptable to me."

"that means you will stay," vestasian declared. "i take it as a
compliment."

and he led the way to where he had been sitting.

vestné rose as we approached.

"you may take my place," she said graciously. "i must see my husband.
i don't believe he's had any supper, and he's come _such_ a long
way."

so we sat down, and she went to him, and as long as i was in the room
they remained together and seemed more than usually content in each
other's society.

but to return to the man upon the stage. whilst vestasian spoke to me
he had been sitting waiting there.

"what is his name?" i asked.

"we never disclose names," vestasian answered. "they all go by numbers.
it is less complicated in the long run."

"and less complimentary too," i added.

"well, so it may be. but then we never pay compliments; they are too
broad."

then he addressed himself to the man.

"would you be kind enough to defend your own policy?" he said.

"he never had a policy," cried someone in the audience.

"he must have had a policy," shouted someone else.

"not at all. he belongs to that class of animal called ‘mammal.'"

"well, what has that to do with it?"

"everything. he has no backbone."

"hs-sch. if you're not careful he will round on you. you're betraying
ignorance."

"no matter. i said it out of kindness to give him an opening. but he's
missed it."

"what is his policy?"

"the destruction of fleas."

"are they not an irish importation?"

"oh, no. lace and poplins come from there. it is a revival."

"what of? potatoes?"

"ask him."

"he doesn't know. he was a foreign secretary."

"but ireland belongs to that section."

"your dates are wrong. this is a hundred years ago."

"why, that's the time when it was united!"

"certainly. ask him."

"ask him what?"

"if he's gone to sleep or lost his tongue."

"he has done neither."

"what ails him then?"

"he cannot speak."

"why?"

"there's no gallery."

"but he is ambitious."

"what has that to do with it?"

"he can ascend to the roof."

"what of his head?"

"he hasn't got one."

"yes, he has."

"indeed not."

"prove it."

"his brains are in a glass case in the british museum, labelled
‘obsolete.'"

"what is his policy?"

"the extermination of fleas."

"he's a humbug."

"that's a dangerous kind of flea."

"is he a war advocate?"

"it just depends."

"upon what?"

"how he feels."

"has he exterminated anything?"

"he says he has."

"what is that?"

"himself."

"did he put himself out?"

"he did his best."

"and failed?"

"oh, no—succeeded."

"he's a clever man."

"ask him to sing the national anthem."

"which one?"

"the english, to be sure. there is no other nation."

"but he's an im—im—im—imperialist. ho—there, waiter!
whisky—soda—rum—gin—and pure beer."

"why do you need it?"

"to drink the toast."

"no more?"

"to wash the word out of my throat, it stuck there."

"you'll get drunk."

"why not? i'm loyal."

"what's his policy?"

"a walk over."

"it's old-fashioned."

"a fight over then."

"never heard of it before."

"a knock over, if it suits you better."

"is he a radical?"

"oh, no. why do you ask?"

"i thought the policy a new one."

"it's as old as adam."

"is he?"

"no. he's older. he generated the policy. so he must be the elder."

"then we come back to the old argument—he's a mammal."

"a fossil, you mean."

"there's not much difference."

"let him speak."

suddenly, in the midst of all this babel and laughter, absolute silence
prevailed.

but still the man sat in the chair. "sir," said vestasian, "would you
be kind enough to explain why you are sitting there?"

"he can't get up."

"why?"

"he apes the elder pitt."

but as they seemed about to begin the same incessant laughter again,
vestasian whispered to me,—

"you look tired, genius. we will go away and visit more interesting
specimens."

thus saying he rose and led me out—the others still remaining so
intent upon these sallies that they scarcely noticed that we went.

"have you guessed the riddle?" he asked when we were outside in the
corridor through which plucritus had first guided me.

"what riddle?"

"the riddle concerning that man?"

"as to his identity?"

he laughed.

"oh, no. his identity is immaterial."

"i think i understand you," i observed. "but i do not yet understand
the treatment."

"think about it. here is his cell."

the door was open and we looked in. it was no different from all
the rest—bare walls and floor and the rude altar—but the light
was absent. just at that moment a yell of scarce-restrained delight
was heard, and looking up the corridor we saw the man returning,
accompanied on either side by devils, leaping, skipping and
gesticulating.

he was subjected to great indignities by them, and they appeared the
more enraged because he took no particular notice of them. he came
to the cell as if guided there by something, since he himself seemed
dazed and hopeless. he stumbled in and fell toward the altar, resting
his arms against it, for indeed, by a terrible truth they did not
understand, it was the only resting-place for any of them.

after the first few minutes spent there he got up and clenched his
hands.

"it can't be true," he muttered. "there's no sense in it."

vestasian laughed.

"come away," he urged me. "he's perfectly right. there is no sense in
it."

from there he led the way up a staircase. it was plain and ordinarily
built in stone, drearily cold and comfortless.

"i will not detain you very long," he said, "for to-morrow i understand
plucritus takes you to the city, and you will need some rest and
preparation."

we came out upon a long stone passage, and i noticed the doors were
numbered like the cells below.

he opened the first one and walked in.

the cells were somewhat larger than the others, but not much. here
stood a man in the centre of the floor, his hands pressed against his
forehead.

by his side were pen and ink and paper on a table, and a plain,
straight-backed wooden chair stood beside it.

after a while he sat down and drew the pen and paper to him.

he began to write, and wrote steadily for some time. then the speed
began to slacken, till at last he stopped. he made one more attempt to
continue, but evidently he recognised it as hopeless. he put the pen
down and got up. again he stood in the middle of the floor, holding
both temples as if trying to force something back that would not stay.

after some time so spent he again sat down, and again began at the same
even, quick rate. but the same result followed and once more he got
up. i noticed the same thing with him that i had noticed in the man
and woman down below: which was, that his breath came in thick, heavy
gasps, as if he were suffering extreme pain.

"it has gone—quite gone," he groaned.

and he sat down and cried as miserably as any lost child might have
done.

vestasian took up one of the papers and glanced at it. he put it down
and smiled.

"this has been going on for a very long time," he said. "if he would
only use breadth of mind and forget things there would be some hope for
him."

"what else is there to think about?" i asked.

"nothing." and he walked to the door, and after we had gone out locked
it once more.

from there he went on to the next cell. i was surprised on entering
to find it much higher and larger than any of the rest had been. a
sculptor stood beside a block of marble, and he was transforming it
into a very beautiful piece of work. he worked at marvellous speed, or
at least so it appeared to me, but time there is often deceptive.

his pleasure and absorption were very evident, as indeed were mine, for
his sure touch and exact precision were well worth watching.

he had built up a marvellous statue, but as he stood back, with all an
artist's keen criticism, to view the work, it suddenly vanished more
quickly than it had come, and left only the spiritless stone. i turned
at last to look at him. he was staring at it with a heartbreaking look
of fear and dull despair. he went towards it and passed his trembling
hands over the surface. then he came back, and i heard the same heavy
gasps, which seemed somehow as if they sent their pain into everything
around.

"i—i—it's all a dream," he muttered huskily, passing his hand before
his eyes. "but it keeps coming, and the more beautiful i make it, the
quicker it fades away."

"it's your imagination," suggested vestasian. "there's no beauty in it,
or if there was, try again. this time you may be more successful."

but he sat down and shook his head.

"when i awake," he said, "i'll try again. i am tired, and the dream is
too, too real. it has been going on all the night, and the night is one
endless spell of blackness and false, fierce hope."

"will you give up?" asked vestasian, softly.

he looked up queerly and then gave a sharp cry, half sob, half sigh.
"oh, god! god! i would if only i could. but it neither goes nor stays,
even like this ghastly flame that haunts me always."

"i think," he went on in the curious voice of one half sleeping, "that
if that light were gone i should be better; it never shines as clearly
as when the work has gone. at other times it flickers round the cell
like some pale torch upon a funeral bier."

"here is the altar," said vestasian, suddenly moving to it. "can you
make no use of this?"

"it is an unnecessary table for which i find no use," he answered
testily, "except sometimes to hold my tools. i do not understand it."

vestasian went to the door and i followed him out.

in the passage he smiled.

"what do you think of them, genius?" he questioned.

"i think they are poor misguided wretches."

"do you think we treat them cruelly?"

"i don't know," i replied thoughtfully. "to me it seems the essence of
torture."

he laughed.

"i think you are really beginning to learn," he declared. "a short time
ago you would have denounced us wholesale. but even the devil is not
quite so black as he is painted."

"i think he is much blacker," i retorted. "but i am beginning to doubt
his existence."

"it is the first time you have been down here?"

"undoubtedly. what acquaintance i have had with any of your people has
been upon the earth."

"and there they appear slightly different from here," he observed
thoughtfully. "but then you know we are much maligned and caricatured."

"why don't you put a stop to it?" i inquired.

he raised his eyebrows.

"the clergy do that for us," he returned.

"they rarely mention you," i commented.

"we are out of fashion. the inferior power generally is. they are so
absorbed in worshipping the trinity that they ignore us altogether.
besides, humanity is tender, it has to be coaxed with love." he spoke
softly, but underlying the tone there was a sneer as cruel as it was
true.

i remember the next cell we visited was that of a little man who, when
we entered, was writing.

"he is a poet—or rather was," whispered my companion. "watch him, as
he is interesting. he is, or rather was, a frenchman, who by his books
kicked over their religion like a footstool."

after a while the poet stopped and jumped up. he was a funny little
creature, even at the best of times.

"it's happened again," he exclaimed. "i'm mad to attempt it—no one
will read it as it is."

then he saw us and came forward precipitately.

"sir," he said, catching hold of vestasian by the arm, "just come and
look."

he went forward.

"well?" vestasian asked.

"is there not something missed out?"

"where?"

"on this page."

"no—nothing."

hereupon he turned to me and caught my arm quite sharply.

"sir," he gasped breathlessly, "look carefully, and tell me is there
not an empty space here?"

"where?" said i, looking.

"here."

"no, i see nothing."

then he sat down and laughed—a horrible, shrill laugh.

"i'm mad or dreaming."

"perhaps both," declared vestasian. "the page is quite complete."

"yes, yes," he broke in eagerly. "it's all right now. it's quite clear.
here, get away and let me go on."

and he pushed us both back irritably.

he went on again for some time, but at last down went the pen. he
slammed his hand over the leaf and gave an excited whine. then he
lifted his hand ever so slightly and peered under it, just like a
schoolboy who has caught a fly.

"it's gone again," he shouted, jumping up. "and i don't know what it
is. it keeps going, and when it's gone it isn't there. and no one will
take it as it is, nor read it, nor—nor anything."

"oh, yes, they will, you're a good writer," said vestasian.

at this he burst out laughing again.

"it's that flame—that feeble, flickering light," he cried harshly. "i
believe it blots the sense out. take it away, take it away."

"but you would be left in darkness."

he shivered.

"no—no, leave it. take it away—leave it. it's always dark, whether
or not. it's always night—and i'm always dreaming the same unnatural
dream."

he crept straight up to me cunningly and quietly.

"did you say there was nothing left out?" he whispered.

"yes."

then he ran to the table and caught the papers up, and returning thrust
them into my hand.

"take it, and tell them if they'll get me out of here—i'll—i'll—"

he burst into the most terrible sobs.

"say it's there because i know it's there," he cried. "tell them it's
there because you saw it."

but the papers were scarcely in my fingers than they were drawn out
invisibly and replaced upon the table, and he himself was drawn towards
it too.

suddenly, with a terrible effort, he stopped crying.

"when i cry it burns a hole in the paper and spoils the sense—ha! ha!
there it is again! clean out! ha! ha!"

again he jumped up and began chasing the light about the room, but it
flickered about unsteadily till suddenly it rose above the altar; and
he, finding it beyond him, knelt down and cried again.

we left him, and when we were outside, and the heavy, inhuman bolts
drawn, vestasian turned to me.

"genius," he said, "why did you speak so thoughtlessly?"

"i spoke from genuine conviction. he said there was part omitted on
each page, and i saw nothing wanting."

"did you not?" he asked meditatively.

"no. whatever was wanting lay with him. you yourself saw nothing amiss."

"i am privileged to lie—or rather to speak the truth on another
principle."

"i see. but, if you know, what was this thing of which he spoke?"

my companion did not answer for some time. then he said,—

"i leave it to you to find out. i like if possible to make people
think—or rather spirits. mankind is deeply philosophical without—"

just then a bell began to toll. it was the most terribly drear sound i
had ever heard.

"come this way," vestasian said. and he led me to a balcony by a short
flight of steps.

from this we looked down through a kind of grating, and saw beneath us
the most gloomy sight i yet had witnessed.

it seemed as if from this particular spot one saw the whole of the
gloomy cells and prisons stretching out and down on either side farther
than the eye could pierce into the darkness. they ranged side by side
in even order, and by the door of each flowed the black river, gurgling
as it passed. every door had its particular number shining in vivid
red, whilst arches like those which form the crypts of churches spanned
and linked the whole. and from here one saw within the hidden walls
into each secret cell, where the naked soul, bereft of every false
covering, saw itself as it really was and could not understand. but
now the bell had ceased, and, as it were, moved by one impulse every
wretched soul flung itself down upon the floor beside the altar.

"oh, god! remove the darkness. give us light! light! more light!"

and one general cry ascended, one universal cry of bitterness, which
died down into still more bitter silence.

as they knelt the light came—the lurid glow of hell—rising like
sulphur fumes about the pillars.

each as they felt its presence rose and turned towards the doors, and
they raised their hands above their heads, and now no sound fell on the
ear.

it was simply the dream-light of unreality, nothing of purity lived in
it.

presently, as a dark curtain drawn across the scene, came blackness,
blotting them out for ever.

what happened to each, or what his lot, or when his term of prison life
was over, who can tell? those who keep the books of hell and heaven
alone know.

chapter vi

"i shall not trouble you any further," said vestasian. "you look tired,
and there is little pleasure in this kind of work except to those who
understand and care for it."

as we descended the steps he took a path which led us once more out
into the gardens instead of back to the guests.

"your guests will miss you," i remarked. "but probably they have a very
charming hostess."

he shook his head. "they have none," he answered; "but they can amuse
themselves."

"have you no one then besides yourself who reigns over all this
magnificence?" i queried.

i noticed that he smiled.

"i am a solitary monarch," he replied, "and yet—yes—i have a
wife—a queen if you will."

"are you not interested?" he asked at length.

"yes. i did not want to betray an impertinent curiosity."

"we understand each other," he went on easily. "if not, i should never
have cultivated your acquaintance."

"then, as you know, it is my greatest pleasure to hear of others,
provided i may do it without prying and without giving offence."

"well," said he, whimsically, "my wife never attends social functions,
neither does she entertain."

"indeed," i interjected, and relapsed into silence.

"she is not quite the same as the spirits who reside here, and
therefore she lives apart, and rarely visits with them."

i began to wonder had he made a _mésalliance_, and yet he seemed
scarcely the kind to have done so. moreover, as i knew well, with
spirits there is perfect equality—at least with the class of which he
came.

"we have not been married very long," he continued. "a few thousand
years only. before that i was—to use a familiar expression—a
bachelor."

he waited for a little while and then went on again.

"there was no particular reason why i should marry. i needed no
children, for we are our own children, and what work i had i found was
of such a nature that i could do it better by entering into partnership
with plucritus than by anything else. he married vestné, and we make
a strong triple alliance. but once in an idle moment i worked out
a theory of marriage. i wished to try a wife built on a different
principle from myself, so i looked toward heaven. you have never been
there, but it is similar to this place. so similar that it is hard to
tell the difference—it is only felt."

he smiled. probably he recognised the "only" was superfluous.

"once, therefore, as i was passing through the earth i happened to
behold a city. and above it i saw a spirit hovering, a lovely, gentle
creature, scarcely formed, except in tender graces and purity of mind.
as she sailed from point to point i followed her, and noticed the
rosy light that glowed about her—her only protection in that harsh
wilderness. i knew at once the place from which she came. i had heard
it made their boast that they would raise up spirits from the dust of
earth like to themselves, and i had laughed the thought to scorn, for
reasons i shall not tell you now.

"and now i saw before me one of these spirit blossoms, flown wild from
heaven, thoughtless of harm or evil, thinking only of sad humanity
grovelling on the ground. i knew that she herself had come from such,
and yet never a more lightsome flower of beauty breathed in air. i drew
nearer, laughing, yet serious. thought i, ‘i will catch this little
lost jail-bird of mine and carry her down to the place meant for her,
and then they may pipe for the ransom.' for no thought of pity or
compassion for her helplessness ever came near me. so i caught her."

he laughed with a mirth which was almost infectious, even to me.

"and in catching her i was caught myself, for i had never realised they
could do things so extremely well up there."

"what was the result?"

"i have told you. it chanced just at that time we were flying over
neutral ground. and she mistook me for a friend, having never known
an enemy, and turned to give me the kiss of friendship. and i, being
courteous though i reared myself, returned the kiss, but still retained
my prisoner. however, i could not keep her prisoner long, for, truth to
tell, she had imprisoned me. accordingly, i brought her here, and when
we came to the heavy gates she cried to go away, being only a child.
but, loving me and trusting me, she came even to this great palace
which i had built in lonely deity. then there came messengers from
heaven, demanding back this daughter, but i refused to give her up,
till at last her father came and begged for her, saying she was but a
child and only brought up for gentle usage. when she saw him she ran to
him with the same outstretched arms which first had welcomed me, and
said that this was heaven if only he would stay and bring the rest.
he looked away and sighed, as well he might, for he knew well that no
clinging bud, however fair and tender, could convert hell and heaven to
friendship. but because he saw that we were truly joined he turned to
leave us sadly, and went away. after that she fretted and grew so pure
and fragile that i feared she would dissolve away, having no strength
within herself. i had no power to strengthen her, because there as here
they build up like with like. so the time passed on for many days. she
grew ever tender and more tender, just like some fading wild blossom
blown from the parent stem by march winds in sunny june. and then at
last she lay like some weak child upon the bed which i had woven from
snowy flakes of lilies for her. and as she lay panting in agony, which
by its wrongful name mortals call death, she took my hand and whispered
she would be happy if she only left a child to take her place. i did
not understand her, but she looked at me with such strange, wistful
eyes that i, as best i could, settled my mind to fathom what she meant.
just then the bell had tolled for prayer within the prisons. she raised
herself upon her elbow.

"‘i want a child, a little child to hold within my arms,' she cried,
and never was child's voice more plaintive or more sweet. and then she
rose from off the bed, light as the beauty which enveloped her.

"‘take me to the grating,' she entreated. ‘i would see them pray.'

"i wondered, for this had ever been the bitterest hour to her. but
because i never failed to please her in what i could, i took her
there. it was just at the time when the sulphur fumes were rising and
they all stood looking in hopeless expectation toward the fast-barred
doors. she leant against the grating like one too weak to stand alone.
but suddenly she broke out into the sweetest song the ear of spirit
ever heard. i listened in surprise and admiration, as never before
had she sung a note. then, looking down below, scanning the gloomy
columns, i saw amongst the mass one upturned face. 'twas that of a man
whose prison term expired that night. next day he returned to earth
to stand another trial, because with great faults unchecked there yet
was that within his nature which preponderated to make him still unfit
for hell. and he fell like some worn traveller towards the altar, and
the last weary sigh escaped his lips, and fled trembling even till it
touched and kissed those notes of purity that thrilled from her." here
vestasian laughed, more softly than before.

"i found myself a dupe again, for the tired spirit, now reft of
everything, even hell's punishment, ascended through the bars to her
who called it. and as the half-unconscious fragment lay pressed to her
bosom she turned to me.

"‘you may take me back,' she said, with the contentment of a little
child. so i took her. and there upon the bed she kissed and fondled
this lost soul, and wrapped it in her own pure robe, and then she
kissed me too, and with eyes shining mistily, still fixed on me, she
passed away, taking it with her."

he paused, but soon continued:—

"so i lost my wife, and lost my prisoner, whom she carried to the
earth and left there, endowed from birth with every spiritual grace,
even from hell's portal. and when she had gone i wandered about
disconsolate, missing her everywhere. when i learnt no tidings of her i
followed to the gates of heaven and entered. my shadow fell across the
threshold, for i think the sun was slanting from the hills, and as i
noticed it i—smiled. ‘they will regard me as a stranger,' i thought,
but still i strode on. at last i came to where her father lived, and
saw her mother spinning by the door.

"‘i have come to seek my wife,' i said. at this she rose and led me to
the house and went through it to an upper chamber. it was all bowered
in rosy light, and sweet birds carolled at the open windows, for it
was summer time. there she lay upon a silken couch, sleeping like some
pure flower-bell in hazy sunshine. by her side, upon the pillow, lay a
little withered flower i had given her, the only store she had brought
from my vast palace—and it was dead.

"‘she will stay here for many days, and then needs care and
nourishing,' her mother observed. ‘when she is strong and well again
she will return to you.'

"with what gratitude i could i thanked her, and kissed my winning wife
and went away. since then, like proserpine of old, she has come to me
and gone. and ever as she goes, in that last gasping hour of pain,
i take her to the grating and she sings. every time some dying soul
responds and she is happy, and will make believe that this one is my
child and her own. and because from her lips these words seem sweet i
never question it, but let her have her way; and if i suffer, i suffer
as best i may, in silence like the rest."

we had stood still beside the lake, and still continued standing,
watching the rippling moonbeams on the water. after a slight pause he
moved along.

"come," said he, "let us be off. there! midnight strikes; and as it
echoes, in the far distance, from the wooden cross above the forest
comes the bitter cry of him who had found his god."

chapter vii

we returned to the palace, and still found it the centre of life and
brilliancy. i noticed, on entering the large dining-hall in which
supper was served, that neither plucritus nor vestné were there.

"will you stay?" asked vestasian.

"i think not," i answered. "i am tired, and not accustomed to many
people. i will return."

almost before the words were spoken i found myself alone in my own
chamber.

in one way this evening had been different from the others. it had
given me interest and food for thought. there was about vestasian none
of that cold languor and chilliness which nearly always distinguished
vestné, neither did there seem to be the same sneering cruelty that
characterised plucritus.

yet as i thought about it the old, old feeling came back upon me by
leaps and bounds, bringing the same old pain.

now that i was away from him, from his clear voice, and quiet manner,
and curious conversation, i recognised with horrible distrust the
fascination he had held for me. i remembered how i had followed him as
in a dream, seeing with his eyes, hearing almost with his ears, even
arriving at the same thoughts as himself, listening to his stories with
an interest as real as if i had taken part in them. i remembered too
how he had singled me out for his attention, me, a solitary unknown
guest, almost a prisoner, having neither friend nor rank in this great
land.

when, however, the interest and glamour had gone i saw him as he was,
or what i took him for—a terrible power, silent, strong and swift,
covered with a veneer of lightness like all the rest.

then came the old cursed sense of unreality. for aught i knew this all
might be a dream; i might be suffering like the poet or the sculptor,
or any of the others i had seen.

like them i stretched out my arms, trying to push the horrid thing
away, because, dream or no dream, the pain was unmistakable to me.

upon this there came another hard conviction.

none left this gloomy region except through death. every tortured
spirit lingered, then passed away back to the earth, or some equivalent.

i thought drearily if this would be my end, and laughed aloud, for the
earth knew me not, neither did heaven, and to my own land, branded with
the breath of hell, i could never come.

i recognised more horribly what would be the end. for death to me was
death in entirety, the pitiable weakness of which plucritus had spoken,
a total dismemberment and absorption by some—yes, why not?—by some
arch-vampire, even perhaps vestasian, or one of the others.

the more i thought of him the more clearly i discerned his nature.
he had told me to think. indeed, i might think safely whilst others
laughed. through all that night i lay awake, hating the coming day,
yet longing for the night to flee away. towards morning, as the
darkest hour approached, i happened to look across toward the wall.
there a feeble light was flickering. as i looked it died away, and
soon afterwards the dawn broke red and golden. on that i fell asleep,
wearily forgetful of all things till wakened by the slave who waited on
me.

i remember he pressed me once more with many sighs, and even tears, to
wear apparel he had brought for me, but i refused.

on descending to the lower hall i found plucritus sitting reading. he
was dressed ready for going out, and by his side vestné sat perusing
a letter. she looked up as i came to them, and the news was evidently
very pleasing to her, for she was smiling. but when she saw me a slight
frown puckered up her brow.

"good-morning, genius," she greeted me at last. "we feared you were not
well, you are so late."

plucritus threw the paper away and jumped up, turning to me. "good—"
but he never finished the salutation; instead, he ended with a violent
"idiot!" that lost nothing by the change in his tone.

"well," said i, "as long as you send me a servant who cannot speak one
word, what can you expect of me?"

"common sense," he answered. "let us have breakfast."

the meal was not a pleasant one. afterwards vestné left us alone; this
hour of the morning seemed one of her busiest. plucritus led the way to
the library, and when we were there he closed the door.

"genius," he said at last, "it is very easy to see what you mean by
appearing like this."

"i mean nothing," i replied, "except that i find my own apparel the
more suitable. for my own part i think it is a very childish thing to
quarrel over."

for a short time there was silence, till at last he asked,—

"how did you like vestasian?"

"i found him a very interesting companion."

"more so than me?"

"in many ways, yes."

"should you care to change hosts?"

"in that respect i find you pretty equal."

"i am going to the city this morning, would you care to come with me?"

for one minute i looked at him, then i answered,—

"i care very little about anything. if i must go, i must. if not i
would rather stay."

he smiled.

"you are altering," he said, "altering in mind and spirit. gradually
you will alter altogether, so that none of your past acquaintances will
know you. but there! i forgot, you have no past acquaintances. it was
you, if i remember rightly, who tried to push your own identity upon
someone else, someone very much outside your own station, who could
only regard you in the light of an impudent beggar fit simply for
spurning aside without remark."

he laughed. "like most ignorant people," he continued, "you have great
conceit and assurance and stubbornness, which you mistake for true
determination. and when all these things fail to assist you, you turn
sullen and think yourself ill-used."

"this is very interesting," i retorted. "i am learning facts about
myself hitherto unknown. is it sullenness from which i suffer just at
present?"

"undoubtedly. you have found some one more than your match and cannot
give in graciously."

but being dull i made no answer, till at last, seeing he made no effort
to continue, i asked,—

"and who may my match be?"

he shook his head.

"if i told you it might be such a blow to your conceit that you would
scarce recover from it."

i did not reply. he rose.

"you are losing your one redeeming quality," he went on. "you never
have an answer ready. when you die we shall raise you a monument and
it shall say, ‘here lies one who died silently after talking loudly,'
and all those who go by will shake their heads and say it was a bad
practice. but come, let us be off. i wish you to see the great city;
for though you may not know it, i like you better than you think."

"i am flattered;" and not even dulness could keep bitterness away.

"now," said he, when we were outside, "i propose that instead of taking
our journey slowly we take it with the greatest possible speed. there
is nothing to see on the way but what one may see every day; that is,
of course, if one has the wherewithal to travel. what do you propose?"

"i am, as you know, quite at your service. quickly or slowly, it is all
the same to me."

"well, then, we will go quickly."

with incredible speed we found ourselves within a large cathedral.
gloomy it was, yet grand, and as we arrived we heard the organ for the
voluntary was playing.

"why surely," i cried, gazing about me, "we are back on earth."

he shook his head.

"no. it's a good imitation. splendid, isn't it?"

"but, pardon me, i recognise this building—"

"one very like it, that is all. this is part of vestasian's town house,
and knowing you were coming he has built people up from stunted souls.
he is considerate."

"at the expense of others."

"oh! we are all that," plucritus rejoined. he put his arm through
mine. "come and stand under the shadow of this monument; we can then
see without being seen. but perhaps you would like to say a prayer. we
will go into the choir stalls, there are stools there and the view is
better."

we went to the stalls he mentioned unnoticed.

by this time plucritus had recovered his good temper. i never yet had
known him upset for long, since though by nature he never forgave he
never let this interfere with his good-companionship.

"now," said he, "look around, do, and don't miss anything worth seeing."

"but what is there to see?"

"a church service. and the church and the theatre are much united, so
that when you go to church you see a play, and when you visit a theatre
you see the other thing. now, observe."

when we had entered the church had been empty, but now it began to fill.

the first to enter was a most elegantly-gowned woman accompanied by two
children.

she rustled up the central aisle and took her position, as did the
girl and boy to the further side of her. next she brought out a silver
smelling-salts bottle, and a bottle of scent with a silver stopper, and
other paraphernalia, and set them by the side of her.

"she has nerves," plucritus remarked soothingly to me. "poor thing!
what it must be to be afflicted like that!"

the children, in the meantime, having stared about, began whispering to
one another. she smiled maternally, but let them be.

"poor little things," he observed. "what an affliction for them to be
mewed up here."

"if you talk so loud," said i, laughing despite myself, for he took
such evident interest in them, "they will hear you."

"not they," he remarked; "they are blind and deaf or they wouldn't be
here. when the choir comes in we shall have to move away, but we shall
never be seen nor heard. vestasian and i once stood at either end of
this large building and shouted to one another as loud as we could on
matters secular."

"and what followed?"

"nothing appreciable. they sang the athanasian creed from memory, i
believe."

next came a rather poor girl, who walked up the aisle in a very
undecided way and turned to the left, to a seat opposite the lady.

she knelt down and prayed for a long time, and when she got up
plucritus noted the time in a little note-book he carried. then he said
to me,—

"would you be kind enough to go and see what is the particular scent
that lady carries—eau-de-cologne or lavender?"

"it won't be lavender," i replied, "that's for the toilet."

"but we must make sure."

when i had discovered i returned to him.

"it is eau-de-cologne, and there is a smaller bottle of wood violet."

"out of fashion, but still...." said he, and made a note of it.

then entered a very respectable-looking gentleman, who at once gave a
tone of staidness to the whole proceedings. and behind him came his
wife, who was matronly and very richly dressed, and behind her came
four children, three girls and a boy, and they all sat down in the pew
behind the elegant lady. the eldest girl curtsied before she went into
the seat at a big crucifix on which christ was hanging, but it was
lost, except that plucritus noted it most carefully. then there came in
three girls all together, and one of them was giggling, and when she
knelt down to pray she giggled more than ever, and then the next began
to titter, and finally the third was overcome also. and still plucritus
noted it and passed a sketch of it to me, so that i wondered at his
great ability in drawing. next entered another very, very elegant
woman, and she walked up to the top pew, and when there she crossed
herself and curtsied, and then went in and knelt down and prayed with
her face covered, so that it must have been very real to her.

next came two young men, who sat on the seat opposite the girls who
giggled, and that somehow or other made them giggle more.

"what are those two young men doing?" asked plucritus of me.

"so far as i can make out, nothing."

"i thought so. did they say any prayer when they came in?"

"i did not notice."

"you should be more exact. i don't think they did. at any rate i have
it down that they did not."

after that a very pompous gentleman with a gold watch-chain arrived.
all the way up the aisle he breathed heavily. he sat down in his place
with an extra sigh, and nodded to his prayer-book, and passed his hand
over the bald place on his head and leant back.

"no prayer again," criticised plucritus. "but he does his share in
almsgiving."

presently quite a party of ladies and gentlemen entered. they looked as
if they had just come from dinner; they were very elaborately dressed.

the ladies carried fans and wore big picture hats and much jewellery.
some of the gentlemen had very small prayer-books, that looked like
toys, and were perhaps meant to testify to their clear sight for small
print.

they made quite a bustle as they came in, and many of the people who
had by this time filled up the hinder pews appeared quite awed.

most of the ladies curtsied before going in the pews, but the gentlemen
did not; they looked bored instead, so that one really wondered what it
was that brought them.

finally an elderly lady with silvery hair came up the aisle to where
the poorly-clad girl was sitting. as soon as she caught sight of her
she raised a pair of gold pince-nez and gazed at her to see if she
were really there. when she found out that she was there she stood
very straight and a look of extreme hauteur spread over her patrician
features. without saying anything she went back and brought the verger,
and he explained somewhat brusquely that those were not the free seats.
so the girl got up and came out, and the lady went in and knelt down
and prayed. the verger conducted the girl to where the two young men
were sitting. it was by now the only available seat, as this service
seemed exceedingly popular. she sat down, and one of the young men
coughed.

the organ had just struck up in a jovial key, but not too loud, as the
congregation didn't like it, and the choir began to appear.

there was a great number of them, boys and men, and five clergymen
followed. as they came the congregation rose, and when they knelt the
congregation knelt, and then they all sat down and waited for the organ
to finish, which it did in due course.

then they all rose, and the clergyman said, "enter not into judgment
with thy servant, o lord! for in thy sight shall no man living be
justified."

plucritus, who by this time had moved into the central aisle and stood
gazing about, now wrote down something in his note-book. i looked to
see what it was. it seemed to be just one word—"evasion." i think
there was nothing more.

next began the exhortation, and he walked slowly back and forwards up
the aisle, with his head bent. he could see better that way; he had
a knack of looking out of the corners of his eyes, which at times is
startling to those who do not expect it.

when the exhortation was over all knelt down, except one man who was
lolling in his seat.

plucritus went up very slowly and quietly and stood beside him for a
second or two, bending his head till his cheek nearly touched the fair
hair. then he drew back and wrote something, and his lips curled up
into that curious smile of his.

i looked to see what he had written, but he closed the book with a
sharp click and turned round laughing. no one noticed it.

"that was a private memorandum," he said.

the whole of the service he walked about, never still, yet always
watching. the smile never left his lips as he glided from pillar to
pulpit, and he joined in every ‘amen' and led the creed, even before
the pastor. as the last blessing was being pronounced he went up into
the pulpit and beckoned me to follow. i went, and we looked down upon
the vast gathering. he leant upon the bible and studied them. suddenly
the brilliant lights went out, and in the total darkness a harsh red
light began to rise. beneath us every form had changed, and hideous
demons were shouting, and gesticulating, and leaping from pew to pew.
at last the whole church crashed down like a well-built pack of cards
which has stood some pretty strong rebuffs, and upon the shattered
ruins stood the spirit who accompanied me: like some great god, one
foot upon the broken crucifix and one upon the topmost fallen spire.

every wretched soul fled out into the darkness, and he, remaining,
laughed aloud.

then he turned to me those deep, inhuman eyes, flashing with brilliant
fire.

"was i wrong?" plucritus asked, and laughed again. "i shall not be
judged. the merciful master who excuses one, excuses all. take me to
that god above myself, that blind power, who year by year and century
by century allows himself to be befooled, and fools.

"let me see the four and twenty elders and the beasts with eyes, let
me see the horses dashing o'er the ground, and view that lamb—that
little bleating lamb—that sits beside him on the throne. let me hear
the senseless hallelujahs! and the fanatic cry. let me see the coarse
and vulgar flatterers who crowd around, more fulsome than the meanest
courtier that ever crawled towards a monarch's throne. take me to this
god almighty, this god all-powerful, this god all-merciful, this god
all-seeing and all-hearing. this god all truth and god all lies. this
power omnipotent. this is and am and ever-shall-be from was eternal.
take me to him and let me look at him, if not from the front, then from
the back, for i have never seen him."

i watched him at every line he spoke, and saw the gibe and sneer that
marked each sentence.

"you blame them for that which you yourself have formulated."

"not i. i blame them for their tawdriness, their mockery, their
arrogant vulgarity. it is none of me nor mine."

"yet it is the result of your work."

he laughed scornfully, then answered whimsically, "but god made me.
his is the greater sin. for i am like the disrespectful son, who, when
accused of ill, speaks of heredity, and blames his father. for i was
good until i sinned, and when i sinned i looked into the past life of
him who made me, and i found that all was quite respectable and quiet,
and the paternal smile still beamed the milder, hiding the devil's
frown which feared detection underneath."

he stood still looking round and laughing.

"had they but known my power to smash their church i think they would
have prayed to me instead," he went on. "i was their god omnipotent
their lord most merciful, the author of their being and their king.
yet they despised and knew me not. they mocked my power, would not
acknowledge me, and prayed to be delivered from my kingdom—licking
the very golden dust about my feet the while. have i not forgiven them
time on time? have i not overlooked their follies? led them gently
by the still waters, soothed their stricken consciences, smoothed
their guilty paths? have i not given them gifts for slander, kindness
for contempt—and what is my reward? they renounce me—me and all
my works—the pomps and vanities of the world i gave them and those
delightful pleasures born from flesh. what a thankless office then is
mine! i who give all and get nothing but renunciation for all that i
have done. why, even the poorest worm of earth would turn beneath the
treatment, and transforming itself into the snake or serpent take god's
voice and utter blasphemy. i, lucifer, son of the light, son of the
morning, son of god, an you will, how meek am i become to let mankind
walk over me and pry into hell to see my chains and weakness."

he spoke in that low, contemptuous voice that had the power to cut like
knives.

"therefore," he continued, "because they renounce me, i renounce
them, being but a jealous god, and then i punish them and they say,
‘nevertheless, not my will but thine,' and look the other way, so that
i am not even held responsible for that, and may torture and torment
them as i will."

"and those who do your will," said i, "those who do it and swear
allegiance to you—what of them?"

for one moment he drew himself up, and pride more strong than i had
ever seen before passed o'er his features. then suddenly he unbent
again and answered,—

"there is a word, a little word—a long one—with a meaning human
dictionary never yet explained to fulness, and it is ‘ingratitude.'
and yet," he continued, "they are happy enough under my rule. i am an
indulgent monarch, even merciful; i rarely punish, and i feed them
well, and i allow them individual work. through the countless ages that
the ball has rolled they have worked well. they carry out my directions
to the utmost letter, so that i rarely need to work on earth myself,
since they swamp it in vulgarity and mediocrity; things generated from
themselves as slaves, having no part in me. they carry out temptation
far better than ever i could do, because they understand the pigmy
minds they govern, and work themselves all round them, whereas i might
pass with a contemptuous smile, heeding and caring not."

"yet," i rejoined, "you paid great attention in this church."

"'twas a full-dress rehearsal," he said. "now they will go to earth,
and whisper in the minds of church-goers. i came unexpectedly to see if
all was right, and, as you see, it was so."

as he spoke the red light which until now had spread all about
vanished, and in its place a blue one rose and the scene changed to a
public hall having a crowded audience and orators.

"this is a socialistic meeting," plucritus said softly. "a kind of
tribune such as they had in the french revolution. they believe in
equality, fraternity and liberty. a rotten trinity, as you see, steeped
in truth."

he laughed.

"look at that gentleman in the middle," he continued. "they are trying
to teach him that he is no better than themselves, and because he
is a dull pupil they have got worked up to proving him lower than
themselves, which sends the see-saw up the other way, and again
destroys the theory. for my part, i always find the french revolution
and movements like it exceedingly amusing. it is pitting devils' pride
against the pride of gods. but that is very badly expressed, and
things badly put are stupid lies. i must begin again. it is like—let
me see—it is like dark scum rising against fair scum. both are bad,
both rotten, but the see-saw is uneven. the devils, who really favour
both sides equally, have a funny trick of scampering from side to
side occasionally, but for the most part they sit on the dark area
and let the fair one rise—it makes more envies and dissimulation.
listen to that man speaking. it is the old cry ‘_a bas!_' down
with everything—except himself and those like him. if you let him
he will cry ‘down! down!' till only he is up. then the chorus starts
against him, and the devils sing the marseillaise as they escort his
soul to hell. he it is who strikes at royalty from the back, or side,
or front, and makes martyrs and heroes of whom he sought to kill. his
reasoning is at fault; he sends the see-saw higher up once more, and
only lands himself in hell. his is a bad policy, a very poor, shriveled
kind of thing, but it suits him. let every man have perfect liberty,
even to kill. let every man satisfy his inclinations to the top of his
bent. let every man worship himself and know none other, and our slaves
will fatten on that they let walk over them whilst it lived."

i was so intent on hearing him that i paid little heed to the scene
below, and in a little while it changed.

before us was a magnificent throne-room, draped in gold, and purple,
and scarlet, and everything was ready as for a grand reception.

the tall doors swung open and tall footmen stood aside to let an
innumerable swarm of pigmies enter. each was striving with his
neighbour and trying to enter first, and so they rushed helter-skelter,
and screaming in wild fury towards the throne. the first to get upon
the lower step was a man, but a woman going by leaps and bounds
outreached him. then a mad onrush brought many to the third step all
together. they strove, and pushed, and fought, and tore, and the woman
who had done so well got thrust right back. but another woman, seizing
the opportunity, made a sudden dive—and yes, she was seated on the
throne, right in the very centre. on this there was a sudden silence,
and instead of pushing forward they began pushing backward, trying to
push each other off the steps and into line.

"i'm first," shouted one.

"i'm second," cried another.

"no. i am."

but with much arguing and hard blows, in which the weaker always were
pushed back, they came to silent order.

then she who sat upon the throne turned to the first man on the right
and said, in a very matter-of-fact tone,—

"now make haste with the ointment. i only want a little on my head. if
you let it run down my back i'll slap your face."

so the ointment was brought, and such a threat naturally made him
careful. he certainly let two drops fall on to her shoulder, but she
only wriggled and muttered something about a "clumsy fool."

presently they all went out backward, as the tall footman announced
that there was to be a reception later, to which all were invited who
had lived fairly respectable lives in the past, for this was the next
best thing to a sacrament; indeed, much better, for here they saw, and
there they didn't.

last of all the queen went out, and the last six people on either side
stayed behind and followed her.

once more we were left alone, but my attention was attracted by hearing
a whimper near me. on looking round i saw the woman who had just missed
the throne. plucritus looked as well. and when he saw her he called
out, "what's the matter?"

"she's got my place, and it isn't fair."

"you should have made more haste."

"i did. but they pulled me back."

"well, never mind. you got there last time, didn't you?"

"yes." and she fell to crying louder.

"cheer up," said he, patting her head. "go and get dressed and you
shall be the prettiest."

at this she dried her eyes.

"will the queen be jealous of me?"

"yes, if you like."

"will her husband fall in love with me?"

he laughed. "much will have more," he returned.

by his tone she took it for granted that she should have her way, and
skipped about in glee, and kissed his hand just as a little dog might
lick it, and gambolled off.

"you don't keep up much state," i remarked to him.

"we don't need to—we are, what do you call it? almighty—that's the
word."

in an incredibly short time the doors were once again flung open and
powdered footmen walked about the chamber, putting it all in readiness.

at last the queen entered, attended by her chief officers and maids of
honour.

she was most magnificently dressed, and looked herself magnificent from
human standpoint, and all her servants looked the same.

after that the reception began, and it was one of exceeding brilliancy.

anon great stir was caused by a woman of remarkable beauty entering,
dressed so beautifully and to such advantage that quite a murmur of
comment arose.

the queen, who understood her court well, gazed round, and then she
looked towards the king, who was a mere cypher in all this grandeur,
except for his crown and the place he occupied.

but, try as the poor king would, it was only natural he should look
towards this vision that had entered. it was quite enough to set all
the courtiers looking at one another, and to make the ladies smile
behind their fans. the new-comer, however, received a very gracious
welcome, even from the queen, who remained in conversation with her for
some moments.

"are they not all very well bred?" remarked plucritus to me.

"indeed, i am very much astonished. are these really they who went out
some time ago?"

"the exact same," he answered. "only since then they have put on stays.
and stays are a great restraint, especially to the women. before they
put them on they are natural, afterwards they become artificial."

"they have not been long in preparing," i commented.

"it was all ready before. it is simply another full-dress rehearsal."
he closed the note-book, and once more the presence chamber vanished
and we were left in darkness.

soon i beheld a very glorious scene arising of vast size and exquisite
beauty. in the middle a fountain played, and on either side a tree
grew in wild luxuriance, covered with purple fruit which hung in heavy
clusters.

from the fountain a broad stream of crystal ran either way, spreading
out like a sea of glass in the far distance. on either side steps of
gold led up to a crystal throne that shone by reflection like the sun
itself. upon the throne sat the figure of a man wearing a golden crown,
surrounded by awe and majesty. his face was bright and shining.

*       *       *       *       *

_a passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

his hair, which shone like gold, hung in thick ringlets over his
shoulders, and his beard, of the same golden hue, flowed below his
girdle like those of the patriarchs of old. in one hand he held
the moon, and in the other a reduced facsimile of the sun, whilst
underneath his feet lightnings played, and above his head thunder.

ranging down on either side were figures garbed in white and wearing
crowns.

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

behind these came thousands of spirits, all carrying golden harps and
timbrels, waiting with impatience. behind the figure on the throne a
white, misty figure stood.

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

suddenly, at the signal given by one of those who sat upon the steps, a
perfect flood of music rose.

"hallelujah! praise the lord! magnify his name—wonderful, almighty,
omnipotent, eternal, lords of lords, god of gods!

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"praise the lord! for there is none like him, neither in heaven nor
earth, holy! holy! holy! jah! jehovah! hallelujah!"

"is it not deafening?" said plucritus, laughing.

i could not laugh.

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

but the spirit on the throne bore it with high serenity.

*       *       *       *       *

_some passages omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

at last he rose, and as he did so fire and smoke went up around him. he
began to speak, and all fell upon the earth, covering their faces.

thus then he spoke to them:—

"_sons, children, and co-heirs._

"_co-heirs with christ and sons of god!_

"_upon the earth much wickedness is sown—and i repent me of my first
intent—with love i sought to raise man from the dust—to set him high
in heaven above you all. and for that reason i have sent my son, gotten
of me before the worlds were formed, to suffer pains and penalties
and death. but man in boldness turned his hand aside, and nailed the
godhead even to a tree—forgetful of my promise and my power—i loved
my son, he was my only son—and yet the earth i must have loved it
more—for when they spat on him i only frowned—nor interfered when
they assailed him sore—i put them in a garden with a tree—like to
this one you see beside my throne—and this commandment stern i gave
to them—‘eat not, lest ye be eaten'—yet they ate. then up i rose,
amazed thus much to find—that they my word regarded not at all—i told
them not to eat, but they would eat—oh! what a vile unnatural sin was
theirs!—i gave them a free will as well you know—to do or not to do,
as they thought best—and if i cramped it in with one small ‘but'—who
could presume to judge my sovran will?—and when they fell i pardoned
them again—in mercy thinking on their nature frail—and spared to kill
them in my father's power. hoping to mould them into better shape—but
they essayed from badness unto worse, and wrung my heart with pangs
unfelt before—till this my son, here sitting by my side—rose and
departed to the manger's door. then thought i now that all things were
set square—that man would love me and esteem my son—they turned away
and thought foul scorn of him—and matters turned from badness unto
worse. yet merciful am i, and all forgive—if they will call upon my
holy name—i will forget about my son for them—and think his death a
victory o'er the grave—go powers omnipotent on wheels of fire—ride to
the earth and call aloud my name—tell them to bow before me, low with
fear—for when i come, i'll come in a royal flame._"

hereon he sat down and loud cries of "hallelujah" rent the air.

"worthy is he to be praised," they cried.

"tis the voice of a god who rules in equity."

*       *       *       *       *

_some passages omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"well," said plucritus, laughing,

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"i must note him down in my book. he is a bad disciplinarian—he gives
them too many chances. it is too relaxing for the morals. if he'd drawn
them up pretty sharp when adam fell he'd have spared himself a great
deal of—well, pleasure, perhaps."

and now the scene darkened, and the whole thing began to crumble, and
the nimble demons ran hither and thither the sounds of weird and magic
music from beneath.

chapter viii

"now," said plucritus, as the scene cleared, "i think it is time for
lunch. neither of us enjoyed our breakfast, and we shall eat all the
more heartily."

we were by this time in a large, light, comfortable room, and on
looking through the window i saw it faced on to a wide and handsome
street, so long that i was unable to tell the length of it. on either
side were mansions of great beauty, built in different styles and
material, so that the effect was most strange and interesting.

many beautiful statues and worked columns ran down the centre, and
arched colonnades, twined with rich creepers, ran nearer to the sides.

plucritus came and stood beside me. "it is a pity," he observed.
"you should witness some of our convocations and assemblies. we have
a special roof designed to arch across from side to side. and it is
worked from wealth and loveliness that all the nations of the earth
could never buy. we do not meet again for some considerable time, and
you may miss the sight."

"you think it probable i may leave you, then."

he smiled.

"well," he said, "i have had a little study in medicines. i think you
are going to die."

"that is consoling," i remarked. "what will the transition lead me to?"

"you know best yourself," he said.

during the repast he did not speak much; but when it was over he took
me to a smaller room, a comfortable and private little place fitted
with every luxury.

there was a fire burning there, for always in the air, despite the
many flowers that grew outside, there was a sharpness which was very
pleasant to those who could appreciate it.

he threw himself down on a sofa and i took an easy chair opposite to
him. i was tired, with that weariness and lassitude which takes the
place of bodily infirmity. after a while he took out a pipe and filled
it with a substance from a cedar box upon the mantelpiece.

"i will not offer you this," he told me. "you would not appreciate it,
though it is far superior to any earthly thing of the same class."

he lay back smoking in quiet contentment, and i watched him, a certain
amount of interest keeping my eyes open, otherwise i should have fallen
asleep.

"what are you thinking about?" he asked at length.

"nothing particular. i was studying you to the best of my poor ability."

"do you find me very beautiful?"

"is not the term misapplied? it would be more applicable to vestné."

"and vestasian?"

"well, perhaps so. he seemed to me a very curious combination."

"yes. that is his chief charm. no matter how ill-tempered i may be (and
you will have perceived i occasionally get that way), he always has
the power to convert me once again to sublimity."

"do you appreciate vestasian's wife?" i queried.

"oh! i see. you mean that pretty creature who comes to stay with him
sometimes. have you met her?"

"no. he simply told me of her."

"ah! yes. i appreciate her very much. if i had my way i'd put her
outside the gates, to go back as best she could, where she could. that
is another peculiarity of his. if anybody else had played the trick on
him that she did he would have followed him like the avenging angel to
the end of time. but because she cries and frets and generally makes a
disturbance every time she comes down here, he invariably gives in to
her, and thinks it's a laughing matter."

he looked over to me and smiled.

"you should see her. she is very beautiful after a certain style. you
would like her too, for till she becomes too ill to go about she is as
merry as a bird, and as light."

"can she retain that lightness even in hell?" i asked.

"why, yes. she is very deeply in love with him, so that there is
nothing particularly saintly in it. and beyond that it pays her to be
agreeable to him, because then she gets her own way at the end."

i laughed.

"you certainly bring it down to a very matter-of-fact level," i
remarked.

"well, she was an arch-deceiver, but because she looked the other thing
we were all taken in. however, she did not do much good with all her
manœuvring, and i expected the next time she came down here she would
have passed me by without a word."

"what had you done?"

"oh, nothing. but i was mistaken, she was no different from before.
since then she has come and gone; how much harm she does is not to be
told, but, being a philosopher, i have come to take it quietly."

"has she a good influence on you all, then?"

"she has no influence on anyone except vestasian—and not much on him.
but the same applies to spirits as to mortals. no man should ever allow
himself to be governed by a woman, not in the slightest. if so, she
will drag him over the most perilous path he ever trod, whether to
heaven or hell."

"what about vestné?"

"she neither drags me back nor pulls me forward. we walk evenly
together, pace for pace."

"have you many cities as grand as this?" i questioned, gazing out of
the window and seeing, from where i sat, the turrets of many beautiful
buildings without.

"oh, yes. their name is legion, and they are all built on different
principles. it is a pity that you refuse to take medicine. i think you
would enjoy being here after a time."

"i had as lief pass away," i asserted. "if i am to be other than myself
i am the more content with a total dissolution."

"and deborah?"

"i cannot say," i answered. "being powerless, i am speechless."

"you should have taken my advice and left her long ago. or you should
have cultivated writing moral stories for young girls; it would have
been amusing."

"i never appreciated young girls. if they are not moral without reading
moral stories, they never will be."

"i think," he said, after a pause, "i will write a biography of myself,
it seems to be the fashion."

he jumped up and knocked the few ashes from the pipe into the fire.

"do you wish to walk through the city?" he queried lazily.

"no. i have judged it from these windows."

"then we may prepare for home."

*       *       *       *       *

_several pages are here omitted._

*       *       *       *       *

when we returned it was just to be in time for dinner. i remember
vestasian was there, and a friend of vestné, a very simple, lovely
woman, who, i heard, had come a long distance to pay a visit.

that the evening passed off brilliantly i was well aware. for the most
part they talked on subjects of which i was entirely ignorant, yet this
was due to myself rather than any lack of kindness on their part.

afterwards the new guest sang for us, and accompanied herself upon the
harp. she sang with exquisite taste, both in choice and expression.
later in the evening she sent for some sketches she said she had once
taken when on a visit to earth.

one or two of them i knew. they were exquisitely done, and we all
admired them.

the evening passed quickly, and i remember plucritus gave us a sketch
of a love scene he had just witnessed on the earth before leaving it.
it was very amusing, or he had a way of making it appear so—i cannot
quite tell which.

vestasian stayed late, and he and plucritus walked back through the
grounds together. i went to bed, and as i looked through the open
window i saw them standing on the bridge by the little gate deep in
conversation.

it seemed now and again as if a laugh travelled thence to the palace;
but, tired and, i may confess it, ill, i soon retired to rest.

the experiences of the day had not been happy. however they might have
amused my companion, i had not shared his feeling. it had made me think
with unavailing sorrow on the littleness of life, and i longed, even
as a prisoner cooped in some foul dungeon longs for light and air, for
some ennobling aspect from which humanity might at least be treated as
a subject somewhat higher than a jest. for myself, i had begun to think
and feel less. the sense of unreality and insecurity which had, up till
now, enveloped me was passing. i saw the shadow of death creeping ever
nearer, and tried to fathom what my sin had been that i should thus die
in hell.

then i smiled. i was no more a judge of my own actions than anyone
else can be, and i recognised simply that my duty was to bear without
complaint until the end.

any form of prayer was quite beyond me. only those who have been in
this iron kingdom have any conception how prayer is crushed in the head
of him who prays. no form of comfort could approach me, nor now did i
feel that i needed any; for life—what one terms life—had been slowly
sapped from me as the long unheeded days had passed.

thus, half sleeping, half waking, the night went by me, and in the
morning i learnt plucritus had returned to earth. i was not sorry.
vestné of late had taken to leaving me alone, and i was grateful for
it. i remember in the days that followed her friend often played and
sang to me. it was the one thing i enjoyed; for the rest, time hung
heavily on my hands.

vestasian came across every day and spent much time with us.

i can remember his kindness to me now, though i am afraid he could not
think me very thankful at the time. then for two or three days he did
not come, and when he did i was sitting alone, the others being away.

"i have been preparing for my wife," he said. "she comes to-morrow."

i think i must have received this intelligence with something akin to
pleasure, because he looked pleased.

"you must come across to see us," he suggested, "as she rarely goes
beyond the grounds. i think you will be friends," and he looked at me
curiously in a way i neither understood nor cared to understand.

i went to bed that night more feeble than before. i dismissed the
attendant on entering the room and lay down in excessive weakness.
i gave a heavy sigh, hoping to find relief, but i found that sigh
followed sigh; it was the gasping pain of which they all complained,
though silently. then i knew this was going to be my end, and i was
thankful i was alone, since when the pain had passed the rest would
come, by total death or change. gazing over to the wall i saw an altar
shining, and a crucifix above. i rose from the bed. must i go too? all
so far had done so in the cells. each died beside the altar. and there
i went, and in great weakness stumbled forward, dying from weakness by
its crimson side.

a light fell from the crucifix, and on a sudden a wild, clear cry rang
through the stillness.

"come! come away—away," and the last word tingled till it pierced
something, i think it must have been the blackness.

with a strength which could not be my own i rose and moved
unquestioning toward the door. i passed out into the silent corridor,
down the white steps to the door that led into the church. this place
i had not visited since first i came, and now in the clear white light
of night each jewelled throne and golden pillar shone like brilliant
eyes all watching me. silently down the nave i moved toward the doors,
and through them, out onto the marble steps, away through the wooded
grounds down to the avenue by which i came—along the dark, grand road,
even unto the heavy portal which swung open silently and let me pass.
then came the wilderness with marsh lights shining in the distance,
faint will-o'-the-wisps, which lead mortals to the awful bogs. on, on,
along the one hard track i journeyed, and the ghost-winds whistled
round me as i flew. the mighty forest flung its shadow o'er me as i
sped into its gloomy shade. but one wide track led onward, and at the
end there shone a light so clear and pure that its rays poured like
softest sunbeams into the darkness round.

end of part ii

part iii

heaven

chapter i

who ever yet rising with dawn felt not some disappointment when it died
away and left nothing but working day, its one unceasing gift? for
dawn with all its freshness laughs and leaves us, caring not that it
has come at the wrong side of day, knowing well that its twin-sister,
sunset, has beauties only for the weary-eyed and sad. we see the sun
depart and turn aside and sigh, since with the sudden twilight the
wraith of silence rises and wraps us all in quietness and thought. but
what would be our brightness and our joy if at the end of toiling day,
jaded and world-worn, we went out to see the sun set, and behold! it
rose. a little pure surprise—a little rubbing of the eyes—a little
unexpected difference—some trivial exclamation—and our hands would
stretch toward that sun—and night be day, and day but a passing,
short-lived night henceforward. for this sun, rising above inanimate
decrees, would bear us on with it and into it, leaving no scathing
burns to mar the path it travelled, but only clear thrilling light. for
with intensest gladness we should hail this coming change—and each
strung nerve, beating like heart of love upon a heart as pure as ever
dawn of heaven's childhood gave it, would relax, and glow with the
clearest pleasure that angels ever gave. the faded, failing, feeble
feet, aching in every little joint and bone, would find the brightness
only cooled and eased them, spurring them on, soft as those little baby
feet that pressed the peeping buttercups on a flowery lawn, to a purer
height where buttercups, if buttercups there were, would be sweeter and
more golden. and the tired spirit drooping like a fading butterfly,
crushed by some cruel, thoughtless hand, with wings all turning to
dull earth again, would rise with other strength and wings eternal,
following the healing light. the sick and tired drudge, scarce better
than a pitiable slave, bound down to earth and hardened usage, leading
a grey and lifeless life, each day more leaden than the one before,
feeling the softening rays would melt to happy tears, and leaden bars
would shine like silver, bearing no weight. the pain-bound sufferer,
feeble and sick to death, moaning in silent agony the livelong night,
fretting unnoticed through the livelong day, would for the time forget
all suffering, and in the after days have sweet balm to pour upon the
oft-returning pain, and drive it out with love's own medicine.

for, could they feel it, all would strive afresh, with strength afresh
and youth afresh to make it theirs. each would hold out to the other
a brother's hand, nor mind the soil- or toil-worn palm. each would be
gentler, firmer; stern against sin, that gaudy, tarnished, creeping
worm, which leaves nothing but breeding corruption in its path and rots
with wily sting e'en when it appears most harmless.

oh! that this light, this ever-shining light, this clear warm sunshine
wrought in heaven out of love, might pierce the heavy, leaden
chilliness that ever prevails. but to this grimed and hardened earth
it cannot always come, because alien weapons drive it off, and men
think because it fades away, and out of vision, it is dead.

rather had the earth die, the sun, humanity itself, all things of
intellect and things of mind, than this sweet radiance melt. for hearts
would harden, intellects grow cold, beauty pass worm-eaten, and weary
sighs change into millstones round the feeble soul, and none would come
to raise, or calm, or cheer, since all would die and wither like a
blighted garden, that once had felt a little yet not all, and then had
faded—saddest of deaths, because it once had known.

oh, light! light! light! what would the storm-lost traveller be without
you? what lingering death of gloom must he endure! what harsh straining
after the ghastly fire-flies, that flicker and dance and then die out
before his burning eyes! what blackened leaves would be his funeral
bed—that now spring up as silvery flowers about his path—what gloomy
gurgles of the river—and hollow moanings through the tracks of pain!
if only all might feel, and see, and know, how altered would this
dreary world become! transformed to paler shade of the hereafter, no
barren landscape leading but to hell.

then should we find no idle scoffers, nor those who sneered upon
another's pain, no wandering disbelievers laughing coldly, nor those
who reckoned only earthly gain. but perhaps this path is hard to find;
brambles and thorns and bushes hide the road. there is no beaten track
that guides us onwards; each step is taken slowly, wearily, uncertainly
it may be, and still the light is hid.

there is a word, a curious word, called "faith"; there is another
curious word called "creed." the latter forces stern belief from
childhood, the former springs by leaps and bounds above the fetters,
and laughs at that which takes its god in hand, and snips and snaps and
pats him into shape, and says to him, as if it were almighty, "thus
shalt thou be, thus only—a fish, a man, a calf, or jumbling trio. bend
to our puny chains and we will worship thee."

oh, creed! harsh jest of harshest godhead, that wrapped itself
about the human brain—and wrapped in mystery shook its sides with
laughing—knowing full well its vagaries were not seen.

for creed has soiled itself with blood and murder, with bitter strife
and false solemnity—binding itself to cruel superstition—straining
at gnats and gulping great big camels. and then when pained with
indigestion, it would at times disgorge sedition sore, and growl and
grumble to its inmost region because its ermine robe the vagrants tore.

there is one creed, one only creed, a thing so far above a creed that
creed grows pale and falters, forgetting its hard dogma learnt by rote;
that little word is "faith," the gift of heaven, the only lasting thing
upon this earth.

the last apostle spoke of love—but was he not a little
premature?—since love is born from faith, none other, and without
faith, love is no better than a blinded god. for love is tender and
most fragile—the sweetest sensitive plant that ever grew, that needs
care such as earth cannot give it, and when stricken by rude winds
blowing from barren lands, droops down unneeded and unheeded—a silent,
shattered, broken heart, even like christ's, whose fragments gathered
by the angels form in that heavenly home the purest, strongest tie.
love is the last great prize, so sacred and so beautiful that none can
fathom it. why therefore should we lay sacrilegious fingers on its
outer robe, and seek to drag and form within ourselves that which we
cannot truly understand?

"love one another," the great teacher said, "little children, little
children." and perhaps if that saying were locked up two hundred years,
and the word sealed in the heart and never on the lip, it would in
silent, restful darkness germinate, and break forth at last to do some
good.

we say it after him like parrots, and prate about the beauty of his
words, loading ourselves with sentiment, devoid of feeling, and then
we go away. do we love? do we forgive? not in the ordinary course of
things. we live barren lives though we may have a dozen children, and
rise no higher than the soil. but let once "faith" break forth to take
the place of hardened creed, and the first little seed has been sown
for good, because in the train of faith morality will follow—and what
is it but the strong elementary ground of love?

for, grasping at the highest, we lose the lowest, our surest
stepping-stones to higher things—as if for heaven we needed no
education, but jumped to it as children born with wings. what lie more
fraudulent was e'er invented, braying the word of love into the infant
mind? as lief begin to teach the classics, and _make_ them learn
it at the age of five.

we teach the babies in our infant standards to pry into the agony of
christ. what do they understand about it? the hardest lesson we cram in
at the beginning and say, "he suffered that for you and me."

and one is sucking sweets, and one has got a marble, and some few good
ones think they understand—and little know the error they have made.

perhaps if we left christ out of it, and let them find by instinct what
they miss, we should have nobler men and purer women, learning by many
a fall to ask for something higher than themselves and earth.

were they but taught morality from the cradle, and trained to esteem
their neighbour as themselves, the road to christ would lead more
purely onward, and he himself would be the great reward.

but no, no, we are all so wise in our own pet religion; we "hem" and
"haw" at this and that, our babies must be baptized so as they'll go to
heaven and must be introduced post haste to god for fear they get left
out.

surely the prayer of the serious mother for pure wisdom for herself
and her child must far outweigh the formal genuflections and harsh
screamings of the afflicted infant.

may we then pray with all true humility, like those poor prisoners
bound in hell, but we with hope, they almost lacking in it, "give us
light—light—more light."

chapter ii

to this dawn at the close of day i too had come. in weariness and
weakness i had fallen down, unable of myself to reach that which i saw
before me. i had remembrance of nothing more; i fell, and the blank
rest of sleep, or death, sank numbly on the silent path. to sleep—to
rise; to die—to live again, so came this life to me, falling in pain,
in weakness, in dull doubt, inwoven with one silver thread—the joining
link to heaven.

but what a sweet awakening! never rose skylark in the summer air so
free of care and pain as i—every hanging weight of hell had fallen
like death's bands, snapped by a living power. soft, gentle, thrilling
life was round me, busy and free from every worrying thought, and
though i heard no music the very air was filled with hidden sound of
life and love and freedom, true music of the soul and surest balm.

still, from an adjoining chamber came the dreamy hum of the busy
spinning-wheel, but because i was tired my eyes were closed, and i lay
listening to the soothing sound. i felt no wish to stir, since weakness
was being repaired by strength, which had in it nothing but life and
purity, the strongest framework ever built.

so i lay, half sleeping, half awake, till roused by a voice speaking in
the room without.

"mother, give me a pearl, i've got to the ninth stitch."

the voice awoke me to the life around. in some ways it was a child's
voice, yet filled with such sweet wisdom and clear cadence that never
child on earth spoke like it.

the wheel stopped.

"which is it, pink or white?"

"pink this time. look."

in both voices there was a similarity, but one was fuller, richer, with
a sweetness childhood never yet could give a voice, however pure.

"when you have put it in, go once more and see if our guest has
wakened."

"and may i take the flowers and fruit?"

i think she must have answered by a nod, for the wheel went on once
more till interrupted by the childish voice again.

"the last time i went in he was quite fast asleep. i put a lily in his
hand, but he never noticed it. then i climbed upon the bed and kissed
his brow, but it was cold, colder than anything about here. i took
his hand and pressed it in both mine, but it was stiff and fell from
mine as if i never held it. then i sang one of my songs, one father
taught me when i was very small, and soon i thought he looked as if he
listened; but perhaps it was only thought, because when i stooped and
whispered, ‘did you hear?' he answered not at all."

the other laughed—a laugh so full of mirth and pure delight that,
forgetting, i laughed too, but being intent on their conversation they
heard not.

"well, we cannot blame you, sunbeam, you did your best, and failed. but
this time when you go, if he is asleep you may shake him gently, it is
time he was awake."

soon after i heard soft footsteps stealing to the door, and my first
notion was to close my eyes and feign sleep once more. but i recognised
that deception was perhaps a thing unknown even in trifles where
children were concerned, so i sat up, feeling no giddiness after the
long rest.

i remember the first glance she gave as she peeped round the door was
one of curiosity to see if i were still asleep, but seeing me awake she
stepped back, and then came forward hesitating, almost shyly.

here was a miniature vision of loveliness, with a face so fair and
tender, and eyes so true and clear, that it did one good to look at
her. and so i felt, for out of pure light spirits i laughed aloud.

"why do you laugh?" she asked, looking up with pardonable surprise to
be thus greeted after so long a silence.

"i laugh to think i had almost begun our friendship with a crime."

"what is that?" she returned.

"i do not know. you have made me forget."

she looked at me with evident and curious interest for some little
time, holding the flowers in one hand and in the other a dish of fruit,
till at last she observed,—

"don't they ever kiss each other where you come from?"

at a hint so broad i had no further excuse for not extending such a
simple salutation. so i stooped and kissed her, and lifted her up with
her various gifts beside me on the bed.

she took some of the fruit in her hand and held it to me.

"eat this," she bade me. "it will make you strong."

so i ate it, and she watched me with as tender a solicitude as any
mother might have done.

"you should eat too," i urged. but she shook her head.

"i'd rather watch you," she remarked, "for you need it and i don't."

"do you never eat for the pleasure of eating?" i asked.

"oh, yes, sometimes. sometimes when father comes home and we have
just finished a meal, we all begin again. and then i forget i've had
anything before and eat just twice as much—at least mother says so,
and she knows everything."

"and who is your father?" i asked.

"he is my father," she answered, glancing at me. "he carried you here
on a fearful stormy night just lately. and he was very tired, though
he is very, very strong, and mother made some food for strengthening
him, because he had not been home for a long, long time, and in the
wilderness there is very little to be had. afterwards they went away
together, and left me here to look after you, and father said i might
sing to you and kiss you, and that would make you well again. our
friends used to come in to watch you too, and we never left you quite
alone. then mother came back, and she kissed me and took me on her knee
and cried a little, and i cried also because she did; and then she
kissed me again and laughed, and so did i, and she was happy, very,
very happy, and said that father was coming home soon and would be able
to stay a while."

as she spoke her eyes shone into mine with a pure radiance.

"i love for him to come home," she said. "i love for us all to be
together;" and suddenly she put her arms round my neck and nestled
towards me with a sigh from which even childhood could not drive all
the lingering sadness.

"well, well," i assured her, "he will be home soon. think of all the
nice times you will have together." but this form of solace was cut
short by her mother coming to the door.

she carried in her hand a steaming bowl of something which was like
milk, but this i did not notice till she brought it forward and drew
attention to it.

to behold her was in itself enough for me.

she wore a simple robe of pale soft green with no ornament, but she
needed none. a figure more brilliantly light and beautiful i never
saw, nor a face more perfect in expression and in shape. yet i do not
think it was her beauty that ever impressed my mind, it was the tender
grace and motherly sweetness which went with her. one could not be ill
nor spiritless where such a being moved, her health and lightness were
infectious.

"sunbeam will be happy now," she said as she came forward.
"chatterboxes always like companions."

and she sat down beside us and gave the basin into my hand.

"indeed, yes," i went on. "in this short time i have become acquainted
with my past history from a certain fall up to the present, and that
was very interesting naturally."

"you are looking wonderfully well after your long sleep," she said.

"perhaps we all need rest occasionally. i feel different. as if i had
thrown off a kind of hanging fever and were strong again."

"when you have taken that," she observed, indicating the bowl, "you
will feel stronger still. you will sleep again in a little while, and
after that you will be able to get up."

sunbeam clapped her hands.

"why are you so happy, little mite?" i asked, for she was no higher
than a child of seven and as fragile as she was fair.

"i was thinking we should walk together in the gardens now and then,"
she replied, and this simple pleasure seemed a great delight to her.

"how long am i to be your guest?" i queried.

the mother shook her head and smiled.

"i think we shall keep you always, till you care to leave us," she
said. "at any rate, i do not think there is any immediate prospect of
your going away."

"i think i shall thrive better here than in hell," i affirmed. "i
cannot tell whether it was rapid or slow consumption i suffered from
when there."

she gazed at me with eyes which had changed to sad sincerity.

"it was lack of all nourishment," she declared. "it kills the strongest
and the weakest off in time. after all, death is the greatest mercy
when it comes, though at the time it seems the hardest pain."

"you know something about it then?" i asked in some surprise. i had
thought such a fair being would have been spared such knowledge.

she laughed.

"well, i know just a little about most things," she said, "so perhaps i
am not altogether such a charming creature as i appear to be."

"on the contrary, i find you much more—" and then i stopped. the word
"charming" did not suit her, and i could find no other.

"you are at a loss for a word already," she interposed lightly. "let
us put our heads together, sunbeam, and think of a word to describe us
both, but it sha'n't be ‘sympathetic,' for that would make us pale and
interesting at once."

"but," i ventured, "sympathy is reckoned a great thing on the earth
just now."

"you don't know," she rejoined, shaking her head. "you haven't been
there for some time, and fashions alter quickly. for aught you know,
tact may be dead, and she is the mother of sympathy, and orphans rarely
thrive in your world."

"you speak rather disrespectfully of both of them," said i.

she looked across at me with a curious mixture of amusement and
seriousness.

"well, my husband tells me about them sometimes, and i generally go by
what he says, for he states plain facts."

"he is not prejudiced?"

she shook her head. "it would not do for us to be prejudiced," she
corrected. "it is a failing of mortals, not of spirits. and, even
reckoned by the world's standpoint, we should lose more by it than even
you do."

by this i had given the bowl back to her, and when she had done
speaking she rose and lifted sunbeam to the ground. "we shall leave you
to rest a little longer," she said, "then perhaps you will join us
later."

and they went out together and left me. with a sigh of contentment i
lay back and almost immediately fell asleep once more. when i awoke the
room was darkening, and stars were beginning to shine without.

but a soft, clear light shone from the ceiling, and by this i rose.

"now," thought i, as the clear water of life dashed over me, giving
freshness and vigour to every nerve, "i wonder if these people will
remark about my plain apparel as the last did." and i went back into
the bedroom.

behold! there upon the sofa, by the window, was a civic robe and outer
mantle of such exquisite beauty, yet so simply made, that i went nearer
to inspect it.

"this, undoubtedly," thought i, "will just fit me. and were it not
meant for me it would not be here." whereupon i took it up and put it
on. it fitted with an ease and nicety which surprised me.

"they must have taken my measurements before," thought i, and laughed.
"and if for nothing else, i am obliged to wear it out of compliment."

a large mirror stood in the wall, and chancing to look in it i was
most fully satisfied with my appearance, which might, of course, be
prejudice.

thus attired i went out along a short corridor which led from my room
into one fitted up with curious spinning-wheels. they were all silent
now, and no one was there, but from the open windows came the sweet,
sad song of even, the birds twittering in the neighbouring trees, and
the stillness that comes with night. the polished floor shone under
the rays of a pale crescent moon which reflected the shadow of a tall
poplar across the room. i stood still and viewed it, and then passed on
to a door at the farther end.

when i opened it a flood of light burst from a wide corridor, having
doors up either side of it and at the farther end a staircase leading
down. to this i went and passed down, much struck with the resemblance
between this and the home of plucritus, in outward things at least.
but with what change of feeling i walked along these halls! light
expectancy took the place of dull disinterestedness, and cheerfulness
the place of hard despair.

on the lower step sunbeam sat, reading a book and i realised with
startling vividness the difference between her and the creature i had
once beheld in the halls of hell. as i drew near she shut the book and
ran up the few remaining steps to meet me.

"we're having three extra things for tea," she murmured confidentially,
"because you are here. and mother has had word that father may be home
in time for it too." she held my hand and danced down in the best of
good spirits by my side.

she led me to the room where tea was laid, and the greatest things i
noticed were cheerfulness and comfort round about.

a glorious fire was burning, for it was that time of year when the air
was very sharp, and in front of it a noble hound was lying fast asleep.

the table had been laid with the brightness characteristic of all
well-laid tea-tables. yet never before had i looked forward with such
enjoyment to a meal.

the room was empty when we entered, so sunbeam took the opportunity to
explain a few facts.

"that is quite extra," she said, pointing with a decided finger to a
salad. "and so is that," and she next indicated a fine salmon. "and
this cake is just the same as we have on birthdays—only it's no one's
birthday to-day, unless you'd like to call it yours."

i assented, and looking round saw on a plate a small bun which, to do
it justice, had not quite the elegance which characterised the other
eatables.

i noticed that sunbeam's eyes dwelt lovingly in that direction.

"i made that," she explained. "it's quite fresh to-day. i've made one
ever so long, hoping father would come home. he doesn't know i can bake
yet, we've kept it quite a secret."

"is this a special treat for him then?" i asked, scarcely able to keep
back a smile.

"yes," she answered, nodding eagerly, and then she went and sat beside
the dog on the floor.

"this is father's dog," said she. "sometimes it goes away with him. it
is very faithful, and once it got caught in a trap and was stolen. but
after a while it got away and came back again. it was so weak that it
could scarcely crawl to the outer gates, and then it fell down, for it
couldn't come any farther by itself."

"who had stolen it?" i inquired.

she shook her head.

"i don't know. i can't quite understand. they must have been very
ignorant, mustn't they?"

"why?"

"well, you see, when you steal it means you take something that doesn't
belong to you by mistake."

"oh," said i, and waited for further instruction.

"yes, it means you don't know what you're doing."

"ah!"

"if you only go on thinking, and rub your eyes a bit now and again to
make more sure, you'll find out."

"but," i suggested, filled with a very laudable desire to learn
further, "you might take something that belonged to someone else
knowingly."

she looked up at me, and presently shook her head seriously.

"oh, no, you wouldn't."

"but why?"

"well, how could you? wouldn't you feel queer inside?"

"i might not. would you?"

"of course. why, at that rate we should be no better than the poor
people living on earth, who are for the most part all born blind."

she jumped up and came back to me, and those pure eyes of hers were
fixed longingly on mine.

"i should love to go to earth and kiss their eyes all open," she cried.
"and so would moonbeam too. but we're too young yet—far too young.
sometimes, but only just sometimes, mother has gone, and then she
kisses them, and then they hear the angels sing, and see the lights of
heaven. mother kissed you before she went away, and it is that which
made you begin to get better again."

just then the hound sprang up listening, and bounded towards the door
and out into the hall. sunbeam, understanding its joyous bark, ran
after it. next i heard the loving welcome, the nearest link that earth
and heaven have.

"father!" such a thrill of pure love ran through the word that in it
one learnt the whole inner secret of heaven. the least vibration of
that tender, passionate voice could have moved anything but hard,
sodden earth, too dull to understand its influence.

soon afterwards they entered by the open door, he carrying her on his
shoulder, and no queen ever seated on a golden throne looked half so
happy or so proud as she.

there then i saw, or thought i saw, for the first time my rescuer, clad
in strong, linked armour, such as plucritus wore, that was all ablaze
with light as his had been; not the light that dazzled, but that which
made more clear. now as i still looked i recognised him with a surprise
as genuine as it was delightful.

"virginius!"

"genius!" he came forward extending his hand, with equally genuine
pleasure, though less surprise than i had shown.

"you did not expect to see me?"

"you are so altered i did not know you."

"in some ways i may say the same of you. yet one can always trace a
likeness in one's friends—however much they alter outwardly."

"you honour me with the name of friend," i said, for i remembered our
parting in the past had been short and cold.

"yes," he confirmed, "i think i am almost willing to take your old
advice and form the alliance, the one of which you spoke."

i laughed.

"i am afraid at present i am little use, being no better than an
invalid, and in my poverty reduced to borrowed garments, as you see."

he glanced at me, then shook his head.

"we neither lend nor borrow here," he said. "what you have is yours by
right—a right stronger than ever money gave."

sunbeam then joined in the conversation for the first time.

"mother made it from the pattern you sent her. i helped her to blend
the coloured silken threads, and those of gold and silver."

virginius put sunbeam down.

"you will excuse me a little while. this is scarcely the attire for a
peaceful meal, but i shall soon be back again."

once more we were left again together, but sunbeam's face by this time
matched her name.

she went to the table and began pulling the chairs to their right
places. she touched almost every teaspoon and knife with a kind of
loving, restless touch, as if she would fain have put some of her own
feeling into them; lastly, she got up on a chair and cast a critical
eye on the self-made bun.

"would you leave it?" she inquired of me.

"why not? certainly i should."

"but it's not quite as pretty as the things mother makes."

"well, you could hardly expect that."

"no. of course not."

then, once having settled that question, she came back to me.

"have you known father long?" she asked.

"yes. a very long time in some ways, a very short one in others."

"you never met anyone quite the same, did you?"

"i don't think so."

"where is your father?" she questioned suddenly.

"i don't think i ever had one," i answered.

"not a father? but whom does your mother live with?"

"i have no mother."

"no mother? oh, dear!" and she turned her head away and dashed away a
tear. but i laughed, the sympathy was so unexpected and, i thought,
unnecessary.

"you need not cry about it. never having known them i have never missed
them."

"yes, you have," she cried, and with a sudden vehemence quite out of
keeping with her looks. "when you have no father nor mother there's a
big blank, though you may try to think there isn't."

"what do you know about it?" said i, still laughing.

"i know," she replied, looking up, "because i know a lot of things in a
way. but," she added after a pause, "you may have mine if you like."

"but," i went on, "they would scarcely love me as they love you, and
might not want to have such an increase in their family."

"they would love you," she asserted, taking my hand in hers, "just as
much as they love me. and i should be your sister, and you would have
no end of friends."

"do friends mean happiness?"

"yes, they mean more love."

"not more expense?"

"i never heard the word before, not in connection with a friend," and
thus our conversation ended.

chapter iii

virginius soon returned, and with him his wife, whose name i learned
soon afterwards was ursula.

but where had gone that coldness, that almost taciturn manner, and the
sternness that had seemed to me his most especial characteristics when
on earth? even that silence, which once in a fit of anger i had termed
contemptible, had vanished. far away from earth and all its unreal
glamour and the false shade thrown on the power of goodness, he was a
different spirit.

like plucritus he appeared taller and stronger here, lacking only
unnecessary outward show.

and ursula, like vestné, was attired in a robe of wondrous loveliness
and grace, but, unlike her, her brightness was infectious.

the meal was the gayest i had ever had, the food the most delicious,
and from it i rose strengthened, lightened and refreshed, to an extent
that hitherto had appeared impossible.

sunbeam's tea-cake had disappeared, for all had had a share of it. in
appearance it had been very plain, but i think if any confectioner
on the earth had learnt the recipe he would have made a fortune and
supplied even the most epicurean king.

"now," said virginius, after we had left the table, and gathered round
the fire, "i have two presents, one for sunbeam, and one for you,
genius," and he brought two small packets from a pocket and handed one
to each of us.

"do you receive nothing, mother?" i asked, for after the first
hesitation the sweetest of words slipped out most naturally.

she shook her head and smiled.

"no," she replied; "when we are married our husbands give us nothing
but our children. the risk of getting them is hard enough and dangerous
enough to prove to us the strongest love."

she took sunbeam on her knee and pressed her cheek against her own.

"this is my present," she went on, "and it will last me in happiest
contentment until i get another. but let me see these other presents, i
am curious."

so sunbeam opened hers first. it was a coral necklace of pale pink, one
of the simplest gifts i had ever seen given to a child. but as soon
as she saw it her eyes beamed and the glow of pleasure flushed on her
cheeks.

she jumped down and ran across to him, and threw her arms round his
neck.

"it's just like moonbeam's. when she sees it she will be as pleased as
i. and you really, really brought it from the earth?"

"really—really. so it's very precious. i made it myself in spare
moments from what material i could get."

"but how is it you've made it just like hers? it is exactly like."

"well, i met moonbeam's father one day, and he told me he had been
making a coral necklace—three plain beads and a rough one—for his
little daughter, so i made one for my little daughter too."

and she kissed him again without any words, but her evident gratitude
spoke more than words.

by this i had begun to unfasten my packet. i felt more of an amused
pleasure than anything else, as i expected nothing but some trifle,
knowing the barren land on which, for the most part, he had worked.

what was my surprise on finding my own ring—the one thing i had prized
and lost.

i think amazement must at first have overwhelmed all other feelings,
then gratitude, such as i had never felt before.

i glanced over to him. "thank you," i murmured, and could find no other
words to give expression to my thoughts.

"you thank me for that which is your own," he smiled.

"but that which was irrevocably lost," i rejoined.

"i do not think so. it needed one hard struggle to redeem it."

"and i, alone, was powerless. the struggle, so far as i was concerned,
ended in total defeat."

there was a short silence, then he continued,—

"the highest victories spring from defeat. give me a soldier who stands
on the dead bodies of his failures. when he has conquered failure
by something higher than success he has become invincible, and his
weakness has become his surest strength."

"you are pleased to see your ring again?" our mother questioned.

"that scarcely expresses it, i think," and i looked at it, and saw the
many-coloured tints sparkling radiantly, as if appreciating their own
return. the scarlet bloodstones had left my hand as i passed hell's
threshold, and now i replaced my own ring on the accustomed finger. i
noticed one stone was missing from the centre, but chose rather not to
mention it, feeling such gratitude for the ring itself.

"is it complete?" our mother asked.

"one stone is missing."

"do you grieve for it?"

"how can i grieve?"

"they had disarranged the centre setting," she replied, "and we were
unacquainted with its previous shape, so we kept the stone apart. here,
you will do it best yourself."

she handed over to me the central opal—the missing stone.

"nay," said i, "you will please me best by keeping it. it is not much,
but if you will accept it my happiness will be complete."

she gazed at me with that curious, unfathomable light i had sometimes
seen shining in vestné's eyes when in a gentler mood.

"are you willing to sacrifice so fine a stone?" she queried.

"if you put it in that light, you do me an honour of which i am
unworthy. take it as a gift, if you will be so kind, and do not mar its
beauty with the shade of sacrifice."

"but if i take it the after-events may be somewhat awkward," she
observed curiously.

i shook my head.

"nothing could be awkward that lay in your possession."

"i am to have a gift as well then?" she said.

"if you will honour it with the name."

she laughed softly.

"you have given me simple trust," she went on. "i will try to repay it
by accepting this, for trust is more to me than admiration, or power,
or wealth, or anything beside." after a pause she continued: "there is
one point about which i am curious. your book—do you still wish that
it should succeed?"

"you call it my book, but it is not mine. it belongs entirely to the
writer."

"the writer has given it up."

"burnt it?" said i, and i learnt from my own voice that annoyance is
not an unknown quantity, even in heaven.

she shook her head and laughed.

"by no means. the writer says the book belongs to you, and would never
presume to such an act. it is simply recognised as a failure, as
undoubtedly it is."

"then," said i, "i am afraid i have made you a very worthless present,
since the stone is the emblem of the book."

"i am fond of worthless presents. i am fond of failures. i am fond of
rejections. you know the old story of the stone which the builders
rejected, and it has always held good from then to now. we are very
clever, we can make so much out of nothing. sometimes, of course, the
giver has to wait for many years, till the last great failure, death,
has been accomplished, and i have known a man who, when shown his
own worthless gifts in after times, took them to be amongst the most
precious heaven held; and when their history was unfolded to him one
big tear of thankfulness rolled from his glistening eyes, and fell, a
diamond of rare price—another gift in lieu of that which we returned
to him. whatever is brought to us can never fall fruitlessly. we
accept everything that is given in purity and truth, and set it out to
gain the interest that it merits."

"then you accept my gift?"

"undoubtedly. it has been offered to others before, but they could see
no merit in it. i think even once it was offered as a sacrifice, but
that would have been a very unpleasant thing, for earth has a generous
heart. but we in heaven can afford to be cruel, selfish, jealous of our
power and influence, vindictive when ill-pleased, anything, everything,
so long as in the end we get our way, thus turning the ill-wind into
fair, to please an intellect that cannot comprehend us."

"you speak in riddles."

"the language of spirits and of god, who never yet spoke plainly, in
order to have the after-pleasure of upbraiding those dull pupils who
could not understand."

whilst we had been speaking sunbeam and virginius had been much
engrossed at the further end of the room, for on leaving the tea-table
we had come to one which seemed much generally used.

she was showing him a very dainty pair of slippers, and they were
admiring them together.

"i finished the embroidery this afternoon when genius fell asleep the
second time. to-night i'm going to put the soles on. they are all
pricked ready for sewing."

"and when they are finished, what then?"

"mother said you would take them with you to the earth, to fit on the
tired feet of some poor dancer she had heard about. it's like this,
you see, father. when you put them on at first they will hurt more and
more, till they get right on, and then they will fit so beautifully
that the pain will be forgotten, and they will bring lightness and joy,
and even happiness, instead of heaviness and sorrow."

"and my task is to get a certain dancer to wear them?"

she glanced at him and scanned his face earnestly.

"yes," she replied.

"and in case i fail?"

"then they'll have to come back again, just as all the other things
do. the other day moonbeam's father came home for a little while, and
he brought a very wonderful pair of spectacles which he said a friend
of his, an optician who lived in our great city, had given him. he let
both of us look through them, and when you looked through them you
could see on to the earth. at the place where he let us look there
was what they call a rummage sale going on, and a great many women
were buying rubbish, real rubbish from other women, who took their
money quite cheerfully and persuaded them to buy still more. and just
outside the building where it was being held there was another stall,
and it was covered with the most precious things, as we esteem them,
that wealth could buy. but no one ever touched it or went near to take
anything, and moonbeam's father said perhaps they were too honest, as
they hadn't the right kind of wealth to purchase with."

"it was rather a sad scene to show you," said virginius, "but still a
very true one."

"moonbeam's father explained it very thoughtfully and kindly to them,"
observed our mother to me. "the rummage sale was a large charity
bazaar, and the honesty he gave them credit for was blindness of heart,
which changes into hardness."

"are they not very young to learn the darkness of the world?" i asked.

she shook her head.

"you forget. they have been through all its toil, and littleness,
and hardened drudgery before. heaven with its greater happiness has
still its greater sorrow. we can employ no sentiment in bringing up
our young. true love springs from no artificial root, and half its
strength is spent in yearning sorrow. i think after that he showed them
some rosy babies lying fast asleep, and one tiny mite being washed and
put to bed, and then the mother knelt beside its cot and prayed, and
moonbeam threw a rosebud down, and the little baby laughed and held its
hands to catch the pretty flower, and the good mother felt her prayer
was answered."

"who is moonbeam?" i queried.

"she is sunbeam's friend. they play and work together. to-morrow you
will see her. when on earth hers was a sad and uncongenial life, yet
she was uncomplaining. and finding heaven while still on earth she
gained sweetness where bitterness might else have fallen. but whilst
those two are talking and planning for the welfare of everyone except
themselves, shall you and i go and view my lumber-room, or store-room i
had rather call it, where i keep my useless gifts?"

most willingly i went with her, passing from the lower storey to one
higher, to a more distant part of the house, filled with the quietness
and rest of sleep.

the misty light of night swept through the open windows, and its cool
refreshing breath played round us as we went. she stood before a door
and opened it, and beckoned me to follow.

we had come to a vestibule covered with pure crystal glass; the view
without was beautiful, for on one side sloped the grand scenes of
heaven, and on the other those of hell. who would have thought such
dissimilar things could seem so much alike?

"what is the difference between these two kingdoms?" i asked.

"a very simple one," she answered. "there is no difference, they are
both alike."

i shook my head.

"surely not," i said.

"then we will say the principle is different and for the present let
it rest. now tell me, if you can, what the first sensation following
failure is?"

"i should say darkness."

she smiled and opened the inner door, and we were greeted with a flood
of light.

she passed in and i followed, and the door closed behind us.

light and music greeted us on every side, coming from some invisible
source. divided off in glass cases and partitions by themselves were
the works of the poor creatures who had failed, not of one class only,
but of all.

"these are only the outward crusts and shells," she said. "we make more
use of the inner essences. those we appropriate within ourselves to
bring in future time to full perfection. but these are undergoing here
a perfect change from dark to light. here is something brought to me
the other day, the outward husk of marriage, that seeming bright like
some pure brilliant flower at outset turned to soft dust and black
decay, slipping from out the hopeful grasp. it is at present very dull
and dark, with no shape and quite devoid of beauty, but with time,
and the treatment we shall give it, it will alter, and when the owner
sees it once again it will be a thing of rare beauty, a priceless
jewel above mortal worth. here is another that has almost come to the
true length of time. you will perceive how the golden rays have become
worked into it till its dull hue has changed to brilliancy. so do they
all alter."

"and this music—from whence does it spring?"

"it is the lonely sighing of poor prisoners—the weakening sobs, the
painful gasps—yes, and those bitter cries that only spirits ever hear
aright."

"then," said i, "you accept all failures."

"yes," she asserted, "but there is one great point to be
remembered—they must come to us, we cannot go to them. till they have
stretched out the first weak hand in supplication, till that weak cry
for heavenly help has reached our ears, we are powerless—powerless as
they."

"this place contains nothing but material failures," i continued.

"what do you mean?"

"i mean that failure with regard to temptation is not included amongst
these."

"they are all here. when anybody having entered on the heavenly path
slips down from weariness or weakness, or maybe from dejection, but
with the pilgrim's steadfastness of purpose struggles up again, we
take the failures and count them to their after-glory though they must
suffer at the time. few men have ever yet reached heaven without hard
falls; they are their strong experiences. on the other hand, that does
not include those who are always down; the man who slips each time
temptation is presented is no use to us. his vain repetitions and idle
sighs affect neither himself nor us. he, as it were, would buy heaven
with dross, and hire another soldier to do the fighting for him."

"i heard you speak of the heavenly, not the narrow path just now. the
expression, i think, is much more suitable."

"yes, indeed. could they but see, it is the narrow path that ofttimes
leads to hell—the narrow path of self that hides all breadth and
height. our path is not narrow, though at times it may be steep—very
steep, and perhaps obscure."

we looked round for some time, learning the histories of men and women,
those dark skeletons in the cupboard that sap away life and youth. yet
of all cheerful places i had ever visited this was the most so; and
well it might be, such things of precious beauty were being wrought
from dull wreck and despair.

"where is my gift destined to be placed?" i asked, as we moved once
more toward the door.

she took it from the folds of her dress and looked at it.

"it is not dark," she said. "it shines as usual. are you quite sure it
is a failure? you may have given me a gift that still had worth. how
terrible that would be!"

i laughed.

"i am afraid it would never have met with much approval. i can
quite see myself that, judged from some points, it might be called
extravagant."

"now," she cried, putting her hand upon my arm, "i'll give you a little
piece of advice, a real piece of worldly wisdom."

"what is it?"

"never admit yourself to be in the wrong."

"but—" i began.

"no ‘buts.' never admit yourself to be in the wrong. i'll give you
another piece of advice too. if anyone says anything to you about your
book, tell them they must be terribly dull of comprehension. it was
simply written as a caricature of everything but goodness."

"you know more about it than i do myself."

"no, i don't. but you forget. you've had so much of the cramping pain
of failure since, that you forget the pleasant hours you spent when it
was being written. i remember one night, after the little house was
quiet, and you had gone away, plucritus took one of those books and
turned the leaves up to a certain page.

"‘look here, virginius,' he exclaimed, ‘is this meant for me?'

"now my husband, though most serious as a rule when down on earth,
could not repress a smile, and i, in heaven, listening, laughed aloud
in pure amusement, unmindful of the darkening future.

"‘i don't know,' he answered. ‘but i think there is a resemblance
somewhere.'

"‘then,' said plucritus, ‘if this fool understands me no better than
this it's time her eyes were opened.'

"i ceased to laugh, for i had known him many centuries, and though at
times generous enough and noble enough when dealing with us, i have
never known him relent one atom in his dealing with humanity.

"‘you should blame genius,' urged my husband.

"‘oh! i will blame as many as you wish. the more the merrier. will you
give me his address?'

"‘i do not know it,' virginius replied.

"‘perhaps when this comes out he will take refuge with you.'

"‘we are not a camp of refuge,' virginius rejoined coldly. ‘simply a
haven of comparative rest.'

"‘you are lying,' retorted plucritus, abruptly. ‘you know more about
him than you will confess.'

"‘i know nothing more than you yourself.'

"but dear me!" she broke off suddenly, "there i am wandering away
from my subject, and talking about muddling identities, instead
of proceeding with my own advice. what was i saying? that you had
forgotten the moral of your story. but you have given the book to me,
and i shall preserve the moral at any cost; and at the same time i
shall remember my duty towards my neighbour and compose an eleventh
commandment to suit my own requirements."

"and what will that be?"

"well, it will run something after this line: ‘thou shalt not step upon
thy neighbour's boots, nor his toes, nor his corns. thou shalt not take
to thyself thy neighbour's likeness, nor his voice, nor his mannerisms,
nor anything that is his. thou shalt not take the words any more than
the bread out of thy neighbour's mouth.'"

"thank you," said i, "that will do. your eleventh commandment seems
rather comprehensive and one long hit against me."

"i'm glad you see it at last," she went on. "you were trying to pluck
the mote out of your brother's eye without perceiving the beam in your
own."

"well, it's a common enough failing. but what about your advice? am i
still to maintain that i was in the right?"

she put her head very gravely on one side.

"well, no. you must never stick to a hard-and-fast line. if i were you
i should go to my brother and i should say, ‘look here. the beam has
clean gone out of my eye, let me proceed to gently eradicate the mote
from yours.'"

"he would be very pliable, i don't doubt."

"yes. but if he seemed unconvinced i should continue thus: ‘brother,
the beam which filled my eye was composed chiefly of ignorance and
selfishness, though, being blind, i could not see it, and the mote in
yours is composed chiefly of vanity and conceit, though, being blind,
you cannot see it either.'"

i opened my eyes.

"did you say i was to call him ‘brother'?" i asked.

"undoubtedly."

"the result of that speech would be anything but brotherly."

"why not? is he then so irreproachable that he is above criticism?"

"i know nothing about him," i replied. "i can only apologise for coming
in his way and promise the offence shall never be repeated."

"but how do you know you ever did come in his way?"

"i do not know. i imagined it for the most part. that needs another
apology."

"and once you said that no apology was needed."

"i believe i did. but i was speaking on the side of prejudice."

for some minutes she was silent, then moved along.

"perhaps you are wisest," she said. "we will let the matter be."

we rejoined the others. sunbeam was now engaged on hemming a
handkerchief.

"it's for someone who is suffering," she explained to me as supper was
being prepared. "father will take it with him when he goes and wipes
the tears from their eyes. every stitch is made of love, and the fabric
is of peace."

chapter iv

the next morning i was up with the light. i went downstairs and through
the open door into the cheerful gardens.

freshness and beauty reigned on all things. the early morning scent
of flowers, the bright singing of the birds, the glorious sunlight
responded like youth's freshest friends to my clear spirits.

i walked amongst the beds of springing flowers and by the shade of
noble trees till suddenly i saw sunbeam coming dancing lightly down the
shining lawn. her hands were waving in the air, her simple, graceful
garments floated like her hair upon the breeze, and round her, like a
cloud of beauty, butterflies were wheeling, dancing as she danced, as
if she were their sun.

she was a gentle, lovely child, free from sin and pangs of earthly
sorrow, yet feeling to her inmost being the tenderest love for all
things.

"good-morning," she greeted, and held her face up for the kiss which
she evidently thought so much of.

"good-morning. are these your friends?"

"yes. we have come to dance for you. every morning in the early
sunlight we do the same. we call it the ‘butterfly's dance'; i sing and
they make the music with their wings."

"where did they come from?" i asked, for they were brilliant, lovely
creatures, larger than ordinary, and with colours clear as light.

"well, they came from earth for the most part. they had pins stuck
through them by people who wanted to find out what they were like, and
some were caught, and crushed, or starved by school boys and girls.
when they died they came to us, and now they're happy."

the dance began. and the singing and the music and the dancing
were infectious. i began to whistle, and continued from sheer
light-heartedness. when it ended the butterflies flew about across the
gardens seeking their breakfast from the flowers and golden fruits, and
she and i together walked towards the house.

we were met at the door by virginius.

"this afternoon we are going to the city. mother says you may come,
sunbeam, if you care to."

"is she going?"

"yes."

"and moonbeam, may she come?"

"i don't know. what will her people do without her?"

"oh! they won't mind just for a little while."

"then you'd better run across after breakfast and ask."

i noticed that in the breakfast-room there were all the daily papers
of all lands, as there had been in hell. also that there were numerous
letters, and one for me.

it was unexpected, but most pleasant. when one has not received a
letter for a long time it is appreciated, even when the handwriting is
unrecognisable. on opening and reading it i found a simple invitation
enclosed to the city of which virginius had spoken.

"we always accept invitations," remarked our mother. "that letter means
you will be welcome to any house throughout the length and breadth of
it. we are going amongst friends, so that though there may be none of
the excitement of seeing one's enemies, the pleasure fully compensates
for it."

"may i ask you a serious question?" i said, as the meal continued.

"certainly."

"have you any title? are you known on earth at all by the name of
saint?"

she shook her head.

"no, i don't think so. i rarely go there. i should have been a saint,
i think, but i missed it by one solitary laugh. you see, i am so very
old that when i was young we had to educate ourselves. now i, being
very foolish, thought it was only wrong to laugh at age, or weakness,
or pain, or infirmity of some sort. and one day i laughed at the high
priest; he looked so different in his robes from what he did without
them. no one ever forgave me, not even the great absolver himself. so
i walked through life quite solitary, and was not sorry when i came to
die."

"but in heaven they received you?"

"yes. the next thing i remember was, i was running about gardens
similar to ours, quite young again. when i was old enough to marry my
husband said he was pleased i escaped the saintship, as it made me more
pliable in disposition. i thought he meant to imply i had no stamina,
and so we quarrelled. it was our first and most delightful quarrel; i
can remember every word of it to this day, though i believe it is quite
three thousand years ago."

"you acknowledge quarrelling to be legitimate?"

"of course, provided it is carried on on a right principle, but
otherwise it becomes a very deadly and terrible thing. we have had one
such quarrel in heaven, and its results have been such as to cause
widespread grief; if possible we would avoid another."

when breakfast was over virginius left us, as he said, to write
letters. i, having no such thing to do, asked sunbeam to show me the
gardens. but this was evidently contrary to the general arrangements
for the day.

"i can't go out to play till the work is done," she said.

"but there is no work to do."

"mother! mother! he says there's no work to do."

"well, we must always allow for ignorance in visitors," and touching a
spring in the wall the top of the table suddenly glided away with all
its contents.

"now," she remarked, turning to me, "would you like to go and see our
kitchens, or would you rather stay and amuse yourself alone till the
work is done?"

"i will come," i assented.

so together we went.

the work here—the manual work—was very quickly and simply done. but
cookery in their hands became a fine art. the room in which this branch
of the daily industry was carried on was built of a kind of transparent
alabaster. the stoves were constructed of a substance like silver; and
the bowls, rolling-pins, spoons and knives were in themselves works
of art. the walls were lined with cupboards or safes, and it was from
these that our mother took all the ingredients that she needed.

i watched the process of preparation with interest. she evidently
understood the mysteries of celestial cookery to perfection, for in an
incredibly short time she had prepared an excellent lunch. she also
had a very wonderful creative power, as i noticed that all the dishes
were made out of pure essences or elements crushed to fine powder like
crystal salt.

one dish i watched with special interest. she had taken a fine white
powder and put it in a silver bowl. this she mixed with some other
ingredients in less quantities. then over the whole there was sprinkled
a pure liquid which turned the whole mass to the palest shade of pink.
then, with a few dexterous turns of a special knife, the mixture began
to fall in light flakes. to this some drops of oil that fell like
crystal were added. it was left to stand in a refrigerator, whilst she
prepared, on a polished framework, a shape of silver scales, tinted in
parts with bluish grey. this done she returned to the hardened mass and
moulded it with marvellous exactness to the form which she required.
over this, as a dainty covering, she folded the shining scales, and
with the insertion of two softened jewels there appeared a fish so fine
and real that not the most expert could ever have told it had not been
caught in pure river water. she then took it to a stove and placed it
where it was held in position by silver spikes. on touching a spring
the stove was filled with light heat. "we never use fire," she said,
smiling. "i leave this here now, and it remains till wanted. the light
gradually works its way through the whole, and then it has become
what you call cooked to a nicety. next, by a very exact mathematical
process, this screw turns again, and the unnecessary light is cut off.
but the light which has entered, and the heat, still remains within the
body. thus when required it is in perfect readiness, so that everything
being properly cooked—that is, full of light—we never have heavy
food, and so are spared the pangs of indigestion."

"you have a wonderful cookery-book," said i.

she laughed.

"a good cook is a born artist, who can put the spirit of taste into his
work," she declared. "you little thought last night when you partook of
that fair salmon that you were not partaker in the murderer's spoil."

"indeed, i remarked upon the delicacy of flavour."

"i know."

thus was every dish prepared with a quickness and perfection very
marvellous, so that as i watched i began to feel an appetite for
dinner, though breakfast was just over.

"there is not much to be done in this line to-day," she observed, "for
this afternoon we go to the city. according to our time, i generally
spend one hour a day upon it, unless i am trying some new recipe or
making an experiment."

and it seemed that in a marvellously short time there had appeared some
of the daintiest dishes imaginable, savoury and sweet.

sunbeam, in the meantime, had been busy rearranging the table which had
passed here from yesterday's dining-room, so she told me. she and i
together went to gather flowers and fruit, whilst our mother went to
make the beds. i remembered that vestné had performed these offices
every morning and alone. i found myself wondering vaguely had she
loved her work as much as these, and then i recollected that she must
have done, because often from the open windows i had heard her singing
gaily, though the songs had brought no happiness to me.

"which is your favourite flower?" asked sunbeam.

"lily of the valley."

"then we'll gather that."

"which is your favourite?"

"red roses," she replied. "moonbeam likes white ones, and
chrysanthemums."

"you have not been to see her yet?"

"no. but i'm going when the work is done."

so we gathered red roses and white, and lily of the valley, and
chrysanthemums, and green foliage, and carried them back to the house.

we arranged the flowers between us, she and i, and were so absorbed
that neither of us spoke.

after a while we were joined by virginius.

"what kind of fruit are we going to have for dinner, sunbeam?" he asked.

"gooseberries," she answered, and laughed. "you had better come to help
us to gather them, and then we shall be sooner done."

"if it is to be gooseberries," he went on, "we will come out to
gather and eat them. strawberries are best on a plate with cream, but
gooseberries are best when picked from a tree."

just then our mother entered.

"there," she cried, "i knew there would be little work done when i
was away. where is the fruit, sunbeam? you have brought nothing but
flowers."

"it's gooseberries," she said, looking up from a bowl of dark roses.
"father says he's going to eat his out in the garden after."

"and are we all to do so?"

"yes, unless you want something else. i'll go and gather it if you want
something else."

"oh, no. i think you had better run over and see moonbeam now; and
listen, sunbeam, give them my love and say i should be very pleased if
moonbeam might be allowed to come and spend a little time in the city
with us."

"genius is going with me, and we'll wait and bring her back with us if
she can come."

so together we went, and as we crossed the gardens and the park many
gentle animals bounded over our path. tall deer that had been hunted
in the chase, squirrels and timid rabbits, birds of all kinds and
countries, horses and cattle grazing on rich slopes, and young lambs
frisking over golden lawns, forgetful of the sacrifice of their young
lives for man.

how joyous and how free from fear their lives were here! the squirrels
bounded along the track in front of us; the deer stared at us lazily as
we passed; the birds flew from branch to branch, following our steps
with music.

"you are never quite alone then, even when you walk," i began at last.

"not unless i want to be. we have to be alone sometimes, you know; if
we weren't we should never grow."

"and you like being alone?"

"yes. up to a certain point it is the best thing for all of us, mother
says."

"do you go to school, sunbeam?"

"no. we never go till we are old enough."

"what do you mean by that?"

"we never go till we are about fifteen."

"and your boys, when do they go?"

"at the same age."

"don't they get out of bounds and management by that time?" i asked.

"oh, no—why should they?"

"i don't know. i imagined it was best for a boy to go to school when he
was seven, and stay there, generally speaking, till he was past twenty."

sunbeam laughed. "he'll be very wise when he comes out of school," she
said. "we take a five years' course, boys and girls alike."

"do you attend the same schools?"

"oh, no. we don't even learn the same lessons. but you'll have to ask
mother or father about school. they know more about it than i do,
because they've been."

"is your education finished when you are twenty?" i continued.

"oh, no! mother says it's only just begun."

"still," said i, "don't your boys get rather spoilt staying at home
till that age? there is so little for them to do."

"they help with the housework," she rejoined.

"and do they like it?"

"of course. it's their duty. if you cannot work in the house you'll
never work out of it—not in a proper spirit."

"what is their work in the house?"

"well, it's the usual work that you've seen going on this morning, and
anything else that may occur. then, of course, we have lessons with our
mothers, and they take up the afternoons, and the evenings from tea to
bed-time we have entirely to ourselves."

"and which part of the day do you like best?"

"i don't know. i like them all."

"you have no sisters or brothers?" i questioned.

she shook her head thoughtfully.

"i have one sister," she answered. "but at times she goes away and
leaves us, and we are lonely till she comes again. moonbeam used to
have a brother, but he went away to school a long time ago. he used to
be very good at making beds."

"making beds!" i repeated.

"why not?" she inquired.

"nothing, nothing. i thought it rather a curious occupation."

"we don't know him very well," she continued, scarcely noticing my last
remark. "he went away to school in the city long before moonbeam was
born, and she is older than i even. he used always to make the beds at
home before he went, and when he went they missed him so much that his
mother wrote to tell him she hadn't slept for two nights, everything
seemed so strange, and not near so comfortable. well, when he got that
letter he was sitting at breakfast with the rest, and suddenly he just
put his head down on the table and cried."

"but why?"

"well, don't you see, it had been his secret. when he had the time to
himself at night he'd been thinking and thinking about it all, and
he'd tried one thing and then he'd tried another."

"do you mean he had concentrated all his energies on bed-making?"

"yes, and he never knew it had had the least effect, because no one had
ever said a word to him."

"not even his mother?"

sunbeam laughed.

"oh, no. why should she? she pretended she knew nothing about it till
he had gone. well, when they all saw him crying they thought he was
putting it on, as he was given to a great many antics, but the master,
who was sitting at the top of the table, was cleverer than the boys,
and when the meal was over he sent for him and he asked him why he
cried. then he showed him the letter, and he read it through, and then
he said to him, ‘you may make my bed as well as your own if you care
to.'

"for he knew it is the best to do things for others. it is how we reach
perfection, when we have learnt by simplicity to trust ourselves. and
that was just what he had been longing for, yet had never liked to ask,
for he had never had anything else to make but his own bed since coming
from home."

"well, what is the end of this long story?" i asked.

"well, the end of it is," she answered very seriously, "he's the best
bed-maker in this particular kingdom of heaven."

i sat down on the trunk of a tree to laugh and stare at her.

but nothing ever seriously disturbed sunbeam; instead, she sat on the
grass and laughed too.

"do you think it funny?" she asked.

"why, yes," i said.

"tell me why," she enjoined, half laughing, half serious. "mother says
we're none the worse for seeing the funny side of things, but sometimes
i can't find it, and she says we ought not to strain after anything."

"well—" i began.

"go on."

"well—" i began again.

"well what?"

"well, really, i think i must have fallen into the absurdity of
laughing at nothing."

"you can't," flashed sunbeam with some heat.

"i can account for my amusement in no other way," i returned.

"if you won't tell me," she cried with more warmth than before, "i
won't kiss you again for a week, and that will be just as disagreeable
for you as for me."

then she jumped up and came to me coaxingly.

"come along, genius," she urged, "just do tell me what you were
laughing at. you wouldn't laugh at nothing. nobody ever does."

"well," i began, heroically casting about for an explanation, "you see
you said he was the best bed-maker as proudly as if you had said he
was the best general, or the best cricketer, or the finest sportsman,
or—or—the truth is, sunbeam, you were thinking of one thing and i was
thinking of another."

"is that why you laughed?"

"i am afraid there was no other reason."

"what's a general?" she inquired presently.

"a soldier," i answered, walking on again.

"like father?"

"in some respects."

"i remember," she said at last. "i was trying to recollect the word
and now i have done so. no, he isn't a general. i don't think he has
ever led an army. when we go to the city father will take you to see
him, for he is at home now."

"has he a house there?"

"he shares one with some friends, for he is not married yet. sometimes
when people are dying on the earth he goes there and makes their
death-bed. he makes them very gently, so that the spiritual pain is
eased. but those hideous demons that gather round such scenes fasten
themselves upon his arms and hands, and hinder him by bites and
clinging hard, so that he oftentimes can scarcely do his work."

"but where is the guardian angel of the dying man?"

"he has none," she answered sadly. "he may have driven him off, or
turned from him as they so often do. and those are the kind of cases
philemon goes to help, because he has studied them. it is no good
trying to help them whilst they live, but our people are bound to keep
the record of their works just as they do in hell, and it is from this
record that he studies. then when he has made the bed so miraculously
that no slavish hand can touch it he waits alone, unguarded, for by
this the demons have fled away in terror. at last the great enemy
comes."

"is that death?"

"it is that great enemy who has led them all their lives by narrow
zig-zag paths, placing bright bubbles and magic music in their path
till the night falls."

"and what of philemon, then?"

"he still stands still, and when the other finds he has not gone he
turns to look at him, and asks him why he stays. then he shows him
the sign by which he has a right to stay there to the end; and in the
presence of the angel of death he draws up his prescription."

"but what is the use of a prescription for a man about to die?"

"well, it means he is not incurable. they carry the prescription out in
hell and he is remedied."

"and is he the only such spirit you have in heaven?"

"no. but the gift is rare, and only those who have the power can make
or use the prescription. if you make the least mistake they won't carry
out your prescription, but tear it up and laugh at it and then there is
no help for the dying."

"and does this gift of making prescriptions spring from making beds?"

"yes. to make the bed of a dead man is better than to make a golden
coffin. it means that he will rise again."

for some time we strolled on quietly, till down the avenue we saw
moonbeam coming towards us.

she was walking slowly and did not notice us in the distance.

"let us hide," suggested sunbeam.

"no," said i. "remember my advancing years. moreover, i am thinking if
we do not make haste and deliver your message we shall be late back."

so we walked a little quicker till we came up to her.

she was taller than sunbeam, with a face whose greatest beauty was its
sweetness. yet with this there was mingled a sadness and seriousness i
had never seen in sunbeam, who was all lightness and love and tender
feeling and little else, though that was heaven's best.

moonbeam shook hands with a quiet dignity and made no attempt to ask
for or offer kisses, yet there was something very winning and frank
about her, which made the contrast all the more delightful, because
of a certain similarity. i thought on meeting they would have had so
much to say that i should have become an unnecessary accompaniment to
sunbeam's walk, but that was not so.

they walked along one on each side of me, as quietly and demurely as
possible, till at last i asked sunbeam why she was so silent.

"it's my advancing years," she said. "i feel as if the exertion to talk
would be as tiring as to hide."

"why are you talking in such an old-fashioned way?" demanded moonbeam,
laughing.

"it's my company manners. mother says i must always accommodate myself
to the society i'm in."

and after that there was no more quietness.

chapter v

that afternoon we went to the city and moonbeam with us.

there is no doubt we made a very happy party, and the journey, though
long as regards distance, was very quickly accomplished in a light
and comfortable vehicle borne by six horses swift as the wind, and
beautiful as perfect strength and freedom make them.

mountains and valleys, level roads and shining rivers, we crossed and
passed. in itself this drive was exhilarating, and the beauty of the
scenes through which we journeyed was unrivalled.

when we first came in sight of the city it was from the brow of a steep
hill our horses had climbed with perfect ease and freshness. the sun
was setting as we came there, and what is sunset but the beauty of
variety to those whose sun can never set?

how magnificent it was only the eye of pure thought can ever truly see,
yet with almost marvellous exactness it resembled hell.

when we came to the city twilight had fallen, and cheerful lights shone
from each curtained window.

a few of their more intimate friends were there to greet us at the
door, and among the number philemon, moonbeam's brother.

now, had philemon lived on this earth he would have been called a
little shrivel of a fellow, for he was no higher than five feet, and
extremely thin. but there was about him the nameless strength and
beauty which marked them all.

"that's philemon," said sunbeam to me as moonbeam was kissing him, and
to see their apparent delight at thus unexpectedly meeting was very
pleasing. "come along, let us go to them." so we went.

"hullo, sunbeam, you're not an inch taller since i saw you last. follow
my advice and keep little, and when you're old enough i'll marry you."

"you see," he explained, turning to me, "it's hard on a fellow when his
wife is taller than he is himself. now, my ambition is to marry someone
exactly six inches smaller than myself, but so far i have found nobody."

"your ambition is a very lofty one," i put in.

"and like all such, impossible of accomplishment," he sighed.

"this is my brother philemon," said moonbeam.

"this is my brother genius," said sunbeam.

"i've been telling him all about you," she went on confidentially. "how
good you are at making beds."

"making beds!" he cried. "why don't you use longer words? you should
call me a celebrated physician, then people would respect me."

"well, i was only repeating what mother said."

"she told you that a long time ago. it's time you were advancing.
making beds! well, i never thought you would have given me away like
that, sunbeam."

she only laughed, as did moonbeam, and they stood with their arms round
each other lovingly.

"well, now, tell me something of genius that is plebeian and paltry. i
feel such an undeniable jealousy rising within me that i shall not be
able to battle with it long," observed philemon.

"i've only known him since yesterday, so i can't tell you anything,"
returned sunbeam.

"you said he was your brother."

"he's my brother-in-law."

"vestasian?" said philemon, and stepped back so quickly, and cast
such a sharp, piercing eye on me, that i wondered, and then felt some
explanation might be needed.

"it is a purely imaginary relationship," i remarked. "i am neither
sunbeam's brother nor her brother-in-law, neither am i vestasian."

"i did not catch your name," he hinted.

"they call me genius."

"but what do you call yourself?"

"i don't know that i ever gave two serious thoughts to it."

"indeed!" he exclaimed, and then moved away, taking sunbeam and
moonbeam along with him. the antics of youth had evidently developed
into the peculiarity of years, because during the remainder of the
evening he watched me most attentively and persistently.

a little later i found him in earnest conversation with virginius, in
which he seemed to be trying to insist upon virginius seeing things
in the same light as himself, but the latter was listening with
incredulous amusement, and left him laughing.

that night after dinner, when he and i were alone together, he began,—

"philemon notices a strong resemblance between you and vestasian—so
strong that he persists in saying you are he."

"oh, lord!" i groaned.

"what did you say?"

"i said ‘oh, lord!' but by that i meant to convey the impression that
it is very distasteful to be so mistaken. surely in heaven there is
peace from muddle."

"i don't know. you began it, so doubtless it may continue."

"but i never let my ambition soar so high as to touch him. moreover,
till very recently i had never seen him."

"well," said virginius, "i don't know, now that it has been mentioned
to me, but that i can detect a likeness."

"so can i detect one between you and plucritus."

he laughed. "have a smoke," he suggested, "you will find that pleasure
counteracts irritation."

after a pause he continued,—

"did you see much of vestasian whilst in hell?"

"very little, till near the end."

"and what was your opinion of him?"

"at the time i distrusted, yet liked him. looking backward i regret i
saw so little of him."

"he took the trouble to be agreeable, then?"

"i don't know that he put himself to any trouble. but he was so very
fascinating that for once i forgot my own individuality in listening to
his experience of life."

"he spoke of himself?"

"oh, yes, always. i never knew him refer much to any other—except his
wife. he rarely mentioned the earth; he told me he did not find it
interesting and rarely went there."

"he found it interesting enough to go there and stir up feud sufficient
for centuries, and having done that, tired of the game and tired of the
plaything, he retired to hell."

"do you know him well?"

"in the long ages back, before the earth was peopled, we were friends.
since then," and virginius smiled, "he has become my son-in-law."

"yet now you are no longer friends."

"on all points but one we would be friendly. our bone of contention is
the earth and planets peopled like it."

"i did not know that his wife was one of your daughters."

"she is my eldest daughter—purity—the loveliest flower that even
heaven ever grew. the gentlest and most innocent child that ever
gladdened parents' heart."

he spoke of her with love and quiet pride, with no trace of the
bitterness and sadness i had expected.

i looked at him.

"could this capture not have been prevented? was it not a very
dangerous risk to let so young a creature out alone?"

he shook his head.

"vestasian did not tell you all the story then? my daughter went by
design and counsel of all in heaven. she alone was free from anxiety or
care, for she was innocent. but," he continued, "i will tell you more
of this another time. let us walk out on the terrace and view the city."

the beauty of a perfect night had invested all things. clustering
roses with delicious scent twined in rich trailing loveliness round
the marble balustrade; and where the steps wound down about a pillar,
lilies sprang up from base to cornice, pure and beautiful and large.

we came into the street. it was scarcely such a one as we know. from
open windows floated the sound of music soft and far away. fountains
were still playing, and the water swayed slightly in the passing
breeze. here and there among the wild luxuriant flowers, where no weeds
grew, a swift form was moving, surrounded by that faint, pure light
that needs no sun to show the path they tread. overhead, arches like
faint rainbows, tingling with silvery light, spanned each street across
the whole vast city.

virginius led me on through many streets till we came to a simple
bridge that crossed the river. in the middle of the bridge we stood and
looked both down and up the river.

its waters sparkled, and the cheerful ripple of the tiny waves, as they
dashed against the pillars below, made such merry music that one almost
thought to hear the fairy voices burst into some articulate song. there
was no gurgle here, no deep, alluring blackness, no sad and heavy
silence that drew the sad and heavy spirit down to its sadder depths.

"you need no wine-cellars here," said i. "this water would intoxicate
the strongest spirit, and give such happiness and delight that those on
earth, once having and then missing it, would pine and die for lack of
it."

"i think not," virginius dissented. "it is the great medicine, the
simple, harmless cure, whose effect is so sure that it lasts through
life, even though it be but in the memory."

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"one does not need to taste it once a week or once a month, as the case
may be, its effects on the earth will last a lifetime. and here in
heaven it becomes a pleasant, invigorating, everyday drink, surrounded
by no false evaporation of mystery."

"i have often wondered what christ's object was in instituting the last
supper."

"christ or jesus?"

"you recognise them as separate?"

"yes," he answered. "but the stronger power enveloped the lesser, so
that the frailty of the simple man was hidden by the working of an
untamable spirit, though they mingled."

then he took up the thread of our previous conversation.

"you asked as to his object in instituting his last supper. i think
it was because he did not want to be forgotten. he simply wished to
be remembered at his disciples' meal times, not as a damper at the
feast but as a loving friend, who had often sat with them before and
shared the simple meal. he was hospitable and sociable, and even in
his last meal showed his extreme simplicity. he said ‘remember me at
meal times,' and for my own part i think many tired folk get more of
his spirit out of a cup of tea or milk or other refreshment that will
invigorate them than ever they get from a formal cup of wine passed
automatically from hand to hand."

virginius spoke softly, with a kind of sympathetic love, as if he
understood the man of whom he spoke.

"but," he continued, "on the other hand, was christ, the master spirit
of that age and others, showing the spiritual sacrifice by the bodily
death this poor unerring carpenter underwent?"

virginius stretched his arms over the wooden rail and leant against the
bridge.

"jesus, the man, was the illustration in the object lesson of christ
the teacher, and his life was the picture that explained."

"but very little of his life is known."

virginius laughed.

"the teacher became so worked up on his pet subject that he forgot
his illustrations and pictures till too late. but he was a marvellous
teacher for all that, and when he was gone the pupils turned to look
at the pictures and the illustrations he had left, and they made a
few slight mistakes in following them out, and some few pages he had
carried along with him into silence."

"then you give two distinct spirits to the one man."

"i will explain it later. what do you think of heaven?"

"i cannot say. i thought once it was possible to express happiness and
appreciation in words, but words fail me. i would have all feel what i
myself have here experienced, for i could never explain it to the full,
words are but idle repetition."

"if you were put to it, do you not think you could write some
explanation?"

i shook my head.

"i don't think so. the task would be too difficult and delicate. every
note would fall flat, i can imagine nothing more hopeless."

he laughed.

"could you describe hell?"

"no. that would be as hopeless."

"and you seem to have no power to describe the earth."

"i am very profitless. had you not had compassion i cannot tell what
would have become of me."

after that we went back again to the house. our mother met us on the
terrace, where she was walking slowly back and forwards waiting. soon
after we all retired for the night, but as we passed the room where
sunbeam and moonbeam were sleeping she opened the door and went in.

they were fast asleep, and sunbeam's head was resting sweetly on the
other's shoulder. they looked most lovely lying thus, yet as our mother
stopped to kiss them she was by far the loveliest of the three. the
purest, rosiest light of love shone round her, giving her a radiant,
heavenly loveliness full of wisdom and purity and strength. they looked
like beautiful, delicate-tinted shadows of a future substance; she like
a glorious reality radiating youth and freshness with every breath and
movement.

with eyes shining in an ecstasy of love she turned to virginius and put
a hand on either shoulder, and drew him towards her, and kissed him too.

that night i slept, happy and peaceful. but one night was only as the
others were, for never here did one lie down to sleep when the joyous
day was over but one felt tired without being weary, sleepy without
fatigue.

chapter vi

the next morning i awoke with the busy sounds of life all round me.
through the open window penetrated the sound of eager voices, and
of people hurrying to and fro. already the sun was shining. a group
of school boys was passing, carrying books, laughing and talking
incessantly as they went. there went a soldier in bright, dazzling
armour, here a civilian, simply clad, yet no athlete ever walked with a
freer, easier step than he.

there went philemon, his head bent in deep thought, his hands clasped
behind him holding a pocket-book.

from another direction came a group of maidens. no need to say that
they were lovely, nothing lived here unless it was so, yet it must
have been the beauty of goodness, as apart from this something which
transfigured them they were by no means built up from any regularity of
mould.

a little later a band of musicians appeared below the windows and
began to play. their music was as bright as the morning sun, and i saw
sunbeam and moonbeam on the terrace dancing gaily to it.

thus to be left out of everything suited me no more than it would most
people. heaven is a place that makes one feel sociable, so i made what
haste i could to get downstairs.

there i found our mother very busy preparing breakfast; but she
was never busy long, she had the knack of preparing things quickly.
virginius was helping her with what little help she needed, and when
all was in readiness he went to the window and called the children.

"genius," said he at breakfast, "i am going to pay a few calls this
morning. will you come with me?"

"most willingly."

"if i take you to see jesus of nazareth, you will not be too grieved if
you find him in simple dress and minus a throne."

"no," i rejoined. "the grandeur of a throne has long ceased to interest
me. if i may be allowed to see him in the simplicity which marked him
when on earth i shall count myself honoured indeed."

"are we to go too?" asked sunbeam.

"no. we will go later in the day," replied our mother.

"we are going for afternoon tea," said moonbeam. "that's better than
going in the morning when all the work is being done."

"yes, of course," agreed sunbeam, wisely. "i don't like paying morning
calls, except to the butterflies and birds. it looks as if you've
mistaken the time."

when breakfast was over virginius and i went through the city.
occasionally we met someone with whom my companion was well acquainted,
and with these we stayed some little time. but not for long, for the
general air of the place was work and business, such as left little
time for anything beside.

at last we came to a street somewhat quieter than those down which
we had been walking, and into this virginius turned. it was cool
and shaded, and on the ground shadows and golden light played from
the trees and sun. a low, long house built in white stone lay in a
brilliant, flowery garden. behind rose the hills clothed with dark
trees, and stretching away into the distance till their white peaks
seemed to shine and touch the sun rays that glinted down to them.
opposite the house, divided from it by the road down which we passed,
was another. it was built like some old chateau, but it had wide-open
windows. in front stretched a lake on which birds were swimming, and
the croak of an occasional frog was heard.

"you keep those animals here?" i queried.

virginius smiled.

"yes," he answered. "we keep everything that has a mind to come to us.
most of those have been under the vivisectionist's knife. we are more
merciful than he, and we count the suffering and death as a sacrifice
for humanity.

"i don't think anyone would grudge them their happiness, and they are
very grateful for this new home."

"heaven is a wonderful place," i said.

"yes, it is about as wonderful as hell."

*       *       *       *       *

_several pages here omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

[editor's note.—genius is supposed to visit the abode of
jesus, whom he finds on a bed of sickness, lying wounded after a
recent conflict with the powers of darkness. he is being tended by
philemon, the heavenly physician. mary, whom the author depicts as the
spiritual wife of jesus, is also giving loving care to her husband. it
should be here noted that the author, in a letter to her publisher,
states that the wife of jesus is symbolical of the church. to quote
her own words, "they say the bride of jesus is the church." but miss
allonby preferred to use the word "wife" instead of "bride," for the
wife "has gone through all the trials of true love, and wives should
be loyal helpers."]

*       *       *       *       *

the day was spent in sweet simplicity and pleasure, with the merriest,
gayest party one might wish to have.

philemon, who at first had subjected me to great scrutiny and guarded
conversation, became more friendly as the day advanced. it was
impossible not to like and yet admire him. the peculiarity of his face
and manner were as attractive as beauty and grace would have been. it
is one of the grand perfections of heaven that mere beauty of symmetry
is accounted nothing; such sameness would breed nothing but dulness, a
thing unknown either to intellect or feeling.

our hostess remained with us till lunch was over, and then she left us
to be with her husband when he woke.

virginius, with sunbeam and moonbeam, wandered off, and later i saw
them climbing up the zig-zag path that led from the garden behind
toward the forest. that forest was a marvellous place, for since then i
have been in it. it contains the pictures of marvellous adventures and
mysterious scenes painted from the world's pale fairyland. glistening
jewels shine upon its grass blades and rich fruits hang from its
shading boughs. they say that as one penetrates further into it the
scenes of earth all vanish, and there appear those of other spheres,
and sounds from outer space. to this depth i have never pierced; one
must be led by a master spirit, and it comes in the course of the
higher education. it is explored shortly before the long journey
begins, and till then would be nothing but useless and inquisitive
sightseeing.

saint ursula (i know not why i call her saint, but that it be that
someone on the earth be led to misconstrue my meaning, and fail to
understand the silent, pure respect that lives when titles all are
turned to dust and ashes in the heart) went with philemon to examine
the properties of a curious element he had detected in the atmosphere
of a far-distant sphere of hell.

i, left alone, sat down in the porch of that lovely home, thinking of
the past events of hell and heaven, comparing them and finding them
alike in everything but their effects upon myself. from this i fell
to thinking of those in whose house i now was sitting. upstairs lay
one whom the world persisted in placing on a throne with an imperial
crown: with a feeling of discomfort, which at another time would have
amused me by its intensity, i began to wonder if the world would again
reject him if it saw him lying here, one among many, and having that
greatest of all weaknesses, a wife. i determined that this was a secret
which should never cross my lips, were i ever free to repeat it, and
then i laughed; deception and smuggling up of truth were alike here
impossible. from that my mind passed on to this pure spirit woman,
whose glorious crown of hair and tender eyes, lit up at times with
mirth and overflowing spirits, set my mind wondering as to her past.

there was such unaffected good-will in her that skipped at times beyond
restraint and left tears in her eyes and laughter on her lips, that one
tried to fathom the soul beneath the spirit and was stopped by the pure
thin robe of simplicity that covered all.

so for long i sat and thought, with no interruption, but amid a golden
silence prevailing, and then a soft rustle stirred behind me, and a
hand was placed on either shoulder.

"you have done just as i wished; i wanted you to stay behind. no, do
not rise, i will sit here."

so saying she came forward and sat on the side seat of the porch, with
the flowers twining in soft clusters from above. she clasped her knees
with her hands.

"my husband is up," she said. "he has some business to attend to, and
then will join us."

"has he been ill long?"

"yes. but he had only been home very shortly. no matter how great the
suffering may be, there is no home-coming till the final blow has been
struck."

she was silent, till at last, plucking a rosebud from the bower, she
added,—

"he has suffered defeat, you know."

now were we both silent; i could find no answer. yet my mind went back
to him as i had first seen him in strongest admiration. at last i said,
half to myself,—

"yet we on earth esteem defeat despicable and chafe under its hard
restrictions."

"earth is not heaven," she murmured softly. "and he has had the
pleasure of hearing of virginius's victory. it has beguiled the hours
of weariness, for i will not attempt to hide from you that in enduring
most we suffer most."

"and the victory of another has eased his failure," i concluded.

"why, yes," she answered, laughing. "we are all in the same brotherhood
in battle. all working to the same end, all striving to attain the same
result."

"may i ask your name?" i said at last.

she touched her lips with the rose.

"my name is mary," she answered simply.

"there are so many of the name," i urged, sitting up. "tell me which
you are."

behind the flower her lips had parted in a smile half tremulous, half
sad.

"memory is sweet to me," she said. "yet some would call it bitter. here
in heaven i am beloved, respected and esteemed, happy and free. on
earth they still remember me as the sinful woman turned to christ, and
whilst extolling his boundless mercy in receiving such as i they ignore
me altogether."

a half-malicious merriment shone into her eyes.

"i died of a broken heart. i could not live without him. it was very
wrong, i know, and showed what poor stuff i was made of, but wherever
i went after that early morning in the garden i saw him calling
me—always calling. i wasn't the one that could preach or teach, i
could only feel things, and often in the middle of the night i would
wake and go through all the agony of those dumb dark hours upon the
cross. it didn't make much difference to my outward life—no one quite
understood me. they pitied me and wondered at me, just as the people do
to-day; they thought jesus very wonderful and merciful because he had
made a friend of such as i, and for the most part they were all stern
men and pure women, who loved me simply because they had been taught by
him. there was no one to lavish things upon, nothing to look forward
to when grey dawn swept the night away, nothing to look back to but
shame and contempt and pain and tragedy of cross and scourging, which
was laughed at and mocked even by those who understood it best. and
i had looked forward so to a glorious earthly kingdom. i had dreamt
each night of the crown and purple robes he was to wear, regardless
of his own sad, warning words. and on that gay entry into jerusalem
the week before his death my heart had leapt with joy. it seemed as
if the prophecies were coming true. i went home to my own dark room
and laughed and danced for happiness, and on the way i bought some
stones—some imitation jewels—for what i had had gone long since. and
there in my own little room i put them on, and a fine robe which, out
of weakness, i had never parted with, and then i stood and saw the dim
reflection of myself.

"‘when the people crown him king i shall be there,' i whispered. ‘i
shall wear my hair loose and decked with jewels, and all will say how
beautiful i am though i have sinned.' for in that moment of delirious
joy i had forgotten that such as i are better absent. nay—for the
world gained deeper hold—i saw myself raised to a higher level than
the women who looked down on me—no more stared at and laughed at by
men—respecting and respected, loving and loved in turn. in happiness i
felt a queen, yet he my king was so far removed above me that to call
him lord were title too small.

"i dreamt—the delirious dream—the burning ball, the shining
will-o'-the-wisp, and it lasted with me—not quite through the week.

"then the light went out, and it never properly lit again.

"it was a strange week, with a great shadow hanging on the air which no
one noticed. the gay scenes and the excitement of the city attracted
me, a wild longing to mingle once more with the crowd and laugh with
it. i listened to the sermons in the temple, and then went away alone
and walked through the teeming streets. i heard some speaking in open
admiration of him, some in more whispered tones; others stood in dark
groups, with scowling faces hidden by sinister smiles. i passed by
these unheeding, for who ever yet with mind pre-occupied noticed word
or look of utter strangers? at night i wandered away to the village
to see our master. when supper was over it was his custom to go forth
alone. i think the hard life and the strain were beginning to tell on
him, though his face was more quiet and peaceful even than it used to
be. and then something prompted me to tell him all that was going on in
the city. i was gay and light-hearted, trying to crush down something
which i could not understand. he listened and was interested, and some
instinct within me made me laugh and talk more gaily than ever before.

"so each night of that last week we walked and talked together, and the
terrible blindness that hung on all was hanging over me. i knew that he
was silent, but i put it down to the silence of fatigue, not gathering
death. and then on the thursday i came again, and the time was short,
but only at our parting did i recognize anything about to come. for
then, as if by a sudden impulse, he took my hands and looked at me.
such a face i had never seen. it seemed as if in one swift lightning
flash it was transformed from peace to agony. i had never seen such
eyes, such look of utter ruin on a face, such haggard, drooping lines.
every feature was pinched with fearful pain—a child's face—a man's
soul—the spirit of a god. they strove together in horrible working
contrast, and that childish weakness which i had never seen before
seemed to me most terrible of all. it seemed as if i saw through the
strength to the utter weakness.

"and then every spark of feeling within me was drawn out to him. i
don't know whether as a mother or a woman, since surely both are one.
i felt as if i had it within me to take his weary, racking pain upon
my shoulders, to ease him of this hellish chain that never kills. and
so, in what to some may seem a terrible presumption, i stretched out
my arms to draw him to me, for i was young and strong, with a power
born of love. and then, with a cry in which weakness and pain, and
tenderness, and love, were all intermingled, he spoke my name, ‘mary,'
and came forward with arms outstretched to meet my own. and suddenly
the weakness died from his face, and left only a purity and strength
so deep that i felt that i had been unconsciously a tempter. and with
a voice so kind and grave and clear that it seemed to convey a hidden
meaning which i could not understand, he said, ‘touch me not. i have
not yet ascended to my father.'

"then i went home, but not to sleep. the veil was torn aside. i felt
that something terrible was going to happen, and far on to midnight i
tossed or walked about. they said afterwards that this had been the
hour of his agony, that cruel fight of god with god, in which human
soul is pierced and spirit torn in pain that may well bring sweat
drops to the brow. they had not watched, heavy with sleep, whilst i
within the city sat with eyes like burning coal staring at darkness.
then in the morning i heard that he was taken, that judas had betrayed
him. i don't think i ever understood the danger, except for one chill
fear that came and went. he was so strong, so sure, so loved of all
the people; but a week ago they had gone out to welcome him, now they
would rescue him, their friend and teacher whom they loved. i felt
somehow that this was going to be the climax, the great crisis that
would begin and end the struggle that was to make him king. and so with
a beating heart and flying step i made to where the crowd was gathered
outside the high priest's house. there was a silence which i could not
understand, one of those fatal, ominous silences that a spark can send
crashing like a thunder-storm.

"when, later, he came out to go to pilate i expected to hear the cheers
and cry that still were ringing in my ears. but no sound came save
the dull murmur of disappointment—at nothing, perhaps. i strained
my eyes to catch a sight of his beloved face. it was the same with
a difference—and with the sight of it my empty dream of kingdoms
vanished like air. the agony of the garden made the difference; this
was a dying animal brought to bay—a broken heart holding itself
together with the firmness of heaven to stand the last sad onslaught.

"i saw the proud pharisees and priests pass by in the procession.

"how i hated them!

"with a hate so black it poisoned all my blood.

"i longed to cry out and raise the crowd against them, that crowd
which, though it laughed, loved me in its own coarse way and hated
them. an iron hand with fingers strong as death clenched at my throat
and strangled every sound. that cry would have altered the day. the
crowd longed for excitement and it found none. it grew sulky, ready to
follow the first leader who came forward on either side, for good or
bad.

"i followed with the stream to pilate's house, and after that i
remember nothing but one long, unnatural dream. i couldn't understand
a thing that happened; the crowd, which i thought would weep and fight
for him, was suddenly one great howling mass of laughter, ready for any
jest or foolery that might present itself. and a crowd that laughs when
a man is on trial for death is a fearful thing—it can be roused to
any cruelty. poor things! they were disappointed in him. and those who
hated him, and wished to see him dead, worked on this disappointment by
laughter and derision.

*       *       *       *       *

_passage here omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"but i never saw his face in life after that first strained glance.
i could not have raised my eyes to look upon his weakness and
humiliation. i followed on to calvary without seeing or hearing
anything, and i kept out of sight as best i could. but when, in the
darkest hour of desolation, he gave that terrible broken-hearted cry i
struggled to my feet from my place behind the cross and stretched out
my arms toward it. oh, god! only those who have been utterly powerless
know its sinking misery. i only fell back again, i was of no use. and
after that what matter? wherever i went, whatever i did, i saw that
haggard face and heard those words, ‘mary!' it rang through the city in
the deadest night, through my veins the whole day long, and then in
accents grave and full of strongest meaning, ‘touch me not. i am not
yet ascended to my father.' in the garden, on the morning that they
call the resurrection, it came to me again. the sepulchre was empty.
the dead body was stolen by the jews; but from that world invisible i
heard the song of angels wafting the words again to me, ‘mary! touch
me not. i am not yet ascended to my father.' it is only a simple story
this of mine, and it is short enough.

"one, too, that has been often told, so perhaps i may have wearied you
with telling it again."

"and afterwards?"

"well, afterwards the days grew into one another like one continuous
night. i think i was a coward, because i had no wish to live. when at
last the sun of life was set and the dawn of heaven broke i left earth
with a happy and contented sigh to enter on the spiritual childhood.
i had lived just long enough to learn to stand alone—for before his
death i had always leant on him. after that i was as happy as happy
could be, and have been ever since."

then for some time there was silence, till at last i said,—

"when i was in hell i noticed some of the finest workmanship portrayed
the crucifixion and agony of christ. since coming here i have seen none
of that. it surprised me greatly to see it there."

she looked at me with a mixture of sadness and wonder.

"ah!" she explained, "that is one of their jests. the finest comedy i
ever witnessed in hell was one based upon that human tragedy. i laughed
and cried at the same time, especially when i saw myself there, hoping
against hope, yet most strongly and most innocently, that at the last
minute he would come down from the cross and stop all the jeering and
the mockery, and drive away the darkness and the cloud."

"but surely when you saw the figure hanging there you restrained your
mirth?"

she only laughed.

"you couldn't see anybody hanging there. vestasian, who wrote the play,
has too nice perceptions for that. there was a cross there certainly, a
monstrous one, but against it was leaning a brother of his, to signify
that the atom of humanity was hidden by the godhead. but because it
was very dark the people could not see him, and it was excusable,
because their eyes were not made that way. he was writing notes and
taking what on earth corresponds to snap-shots. he was so silent that
no one understood his presence, though they felt it. when they laughed
they were laughing at him, and he laughed with them all the time,
luring, tempting, spreading his terrible shadow over them and on the
sufferer. in fact, throughout the whole great drama one never saw the
central human figure because of him. it was he who stood on trial at
the sham judgment before annas and caiaphas and pilate and herod. and
upon these occasions, as a little aside appreciated only by those of
the same understanding as himself, he appeared with crown and sceptre
and robes and jewels of such kingly splendour that the whole court
was more blinded than when under the cross's shadow. and when pilate,
tempted by the little mouthing demon on his shoulder, turned with a
half-irritable sneer to ask, ‘what is truth?' he only shook his head
and smiled so whimsically that one was compelled to laugh, the farce
had reached to such a pitch."

after a pause i continued:—

"moreover, i notice you have no churches. i have heard no prayers, seen
neither pulpit nor altar; all these were very evident in the vaults of
hell."

she rose and came over to me.

"you try to show a wonder that you do not feel," she said. "we need
none of these, they are a part of hell's bondage and its slavery. to
have the kingdom of heaven within one is to need no more. it builds its
own temple in sacred silence, and sends the life blood beating into
every vein. it is only on earth, where the real thing is so rarely
found, that the outward show is needed."

a great silence followed, till at last she drew away the folds of her
white robe and showed me to the inner depths of her pure spirit. there
in the centre of the heart, composed of light and love, i saw the
figure and the cross. i could ask no further, and in silence she drew
the soft folds back again.

"it is the link that joins the earth to us, us to the earth," she
observed at last. "it is born in our children, none yet have come to
us without it. if you care to examine into the structure of your own
spirit you will find it too."

"oh, yes. i was fully aware of what was in myself. but i thought i was
somewhat unique."

she burst out laughing.

"there now, that's another touch of nature that makes the whole world
kin. it's surprising the amount of people who think they are ‘the only
ones.'"

she was still laughing when jesus joined us. she ran to meet him,
happy, light-hearted, and beautiful as summer sunlight. together they
truly made a most wonderful picture of beauty and perfection, though
she was slightly the taller of the two.

he took the seat i offered him and she arranged it most comfortably
with cushions, still laughing at what she termed my "very common
conceit."

*       *       *       *       *

_a page of ms. here omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

tea being over, we prepared to go; but before going our hostess
conducted all of us upstairs to a room leading from her own. it was
filled with pink and white roses, and a carpet made of silken rose
petals covered the floor. the windows were closed, but inside the room
pure lights of many lovely colours interwoven were playing from wall to
wall, from ceiling to floor. these made sweet music as they touched and
intermingled like harp-strings played by a passing breeze, and around
the bed, made from one giant hollowed pearl, such as the world ne'er
saw nor dreamt of, garlands of roses fell, and lily petals formed the
counterpane. in the centre of all this pure loveliness lay the infant
spirit, with a beauty words cannot paint. the smile of death is frozen
and cold, but here was its facsimile in life and warmth. one hand
lay resting on the counterpane and one upon the pillow, resting the
sleepy head. the soft glow of health flushed either cheek, and dyed the
parting lips; yet over all there was a nameless majesty and rest, a
sleeping spirit begotten of the hard seeds of earth.

suddenly saint ursula moved to where jesus stood beside the bed and put
her arm through his.

"suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for
of such is the kingdom of heaven," she said softly.

"was this a little child?" i asked at length.

"oh, no," replied the mother, kneeling down and pressing the soft arm
to her lips. "this was a full-grown man, whose life had been spent in
one long battle with sin and self. this is not a little human child,
but a spirit child born from the fruit seeds of a lifetime. soon the
happy childhood of the spirit will begin, for on earth there is no
such thing. it is for the most part nothing but striving there to get
together the essential seeds to form a spirit."

"you do not devote much time to these young children," i observed as we
came out together later.

she smiled.

"not outwardly," she corrected. "but after they are born they need a
long, long rest, and occasionally at fixed intervals such spiritual
nourishment as we give them from ourselves. and spiritual food is very
delicious," she added, laughing. "it has nothing to do with the ten
commandments nor any of those kinds of things, though they form part
of the soil in which it is grown. but then one doesn't eat the soil,
though one enjoys the fruit; yet some people on the earth are very
stupid and can't understand the difference between the two. but the
soil needs a deal of work before it is fit for cultivation, and the
toiler does not reap the food till he is dead."

so saying, she left me to think, and all the way home i heard
indistinctly sunbeam's and moonbeam's accents of joy over this new
addition to their friends' family.

*       *       *       *       *

_a chapter here omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

chapter vii

the days flew away, all happy and free from care.

one evening, after dinner, virginius asked me to take a walk with him.
we strolled into the clear night, and through the grounds that lay
behind the house. this brought us to the outskirts of the city, and the
road led up a gentle hillside toward the forest, that bounded this side
of the city for many miles.

he led me into it, and its wonderful soft beauty descended on the
spirit, and brought a feeling half of sadness unmixed with pain.
indeed, to be sad in heaven is a luxury—one of the most delicate
pleasures it can give.

along the winding paths and mossy banks the faintest glow of light was
shining. it now touched the sleeping flower-bells and the blades of
grass, whitened the dark barks of trees, and lit upon the forest brooks
that rippled and clattered in the silence with an _abandon_ all
their own.

we walked on, each occupied by thoughts, sweet perhaps as sad, till at
last, throwing himself down on a bank that sloped towards a branching
rivulet, he spoke.

"genius, i am going to tell you something. perhaps the world will
laugh—it has ever laughed when truth was spoken—but, be that as it
may, you can but repeat with truthfulness and pure simplicity what
you have heard me say. i have fought many years for the earth, have
undergone great hardships for it, been true to it through thick and
thin, pitied it, striven for it, respected its suffering. i do not say
this in order to extol my own hard labours. why should i? others like
myself are working and have worked—it is our duty. but now i am going
to tell you a little of its history. i force it upon no one. i tell it
you, you will repeat it to others; whether they think about it or laugh
at it, it is not for me to say. but if they think, they will not laugh,
of that you may rest assured.

"long ago, in the ages long before man was ever known upon the earth,
the spirit world moved and lived. from eternity into eternity, so the
great wave ran, just as it ever has and will do. man cannot grasp it,
no more than a lifeless seed can understand the flower it brings to
light and life. we were happy, in that half-unconscious youth that
clings through eternity. springing into life and form and power by
our own strength and guiding intellect, glorious and true in every
conception, with other life springing up around us, giving and taking,
now one thing, now another, a mist, a wraith, unconsciousness of
feeling or of form, then again resplendent, hard or brilliant, full
of consciousness or life. and so the ages rolled in this corner of
space in which we lived. sometimes we would roam abroad as now into
the far, far fields of space, ever with that courteous interchange of
hospitality which is the birthright of all our race. we were friends,
friends as only those born as gods can ever be. to live with us was to
love and to respect. but this has nothing to do with humanity, i must
advance.

"the blind forces of nature were our servants—i have shown you how.
pure intellect and inanimate material devoid of feeling and the higher life. then because experiment and
movement are a part of our being we designed the worlds. some gave
one thing, some another, and at last the mighty cast was ready. then
came the great convocation, and the question, whom to put upon these
spheres. those ours previously we retained, but those thrown off from
us were a prize for the highest intellect to settle.

"i remember well the great assembly seated on thrones which were no
thrones of preparation, but the outcome of that dazzling light which
draws round all of us.

"then vestasian rose—you know him—fairest of the fair—lightest of
light—the best-beloved of all. he was more beautiful than the sun, and
stronger, with what seemed to be all the soft graces that combine in
woman, all the clear intellect and strength of man. i doubt that this
soft grace was but the flimsy covering that hid the great difference
betwixt such as he and me. till then he had been my best-beloved
brother next to plucritus, who, once having sprung into birth with me,
was like myself.

"but to return.

"in the clear silence that accompanied his rising vestasian spoke,—

"‘it is our nature to be kind and courteous. nature, our humble
servant, needs some reward for all these ages of untiring work. we can
but repay her labours with a crown made in our own image, built on our
lines, endued with all our intellect and reason, called by the simple
name of man.'

"you know his voice, as sweet as any woman's, yet with the deep note
ringing in it that compels a hearing, even from those who would not
hear.

"ringing applause followed these words, for his simplicity and courtesy
were wonderful; he had given voice to the thoughts of all, yet with
such sweet humility that never had my love for him before reached such
limits.

"then from near at hand plucritus spoke, leaning back half indolently,
a faint smile hovering on his lips.

"‘are we to raise gods from soil?' he asked. ‘nature will groan beneath
the burden and cast it on to us.'

"silence followed, till a brother of vestasian, he who stood before the
cross and appeared in the hall of pilate, said, ‘let nature provide the
flesh and blood, we will supply the rest.'

"next gabriel rose.

"‘first let us hear vestasian through,' he suggested. ‘this is a
project of which i for one would hear still more.'

"vestasian rose and made that speech which in the annals of heaven is
so famous. i will give it briefly, leaving out much that he put in.

"‘i advise that we raise from the dust of earth beings like ourselves,
inferior only in power, eternity, and infinite conception of wisdom.
they should be the greatest living ornament of nature, exceeding
everything. their lives should be a span of golden happiness and
pleasure, as like our own as possible. but being frail, and merely the
experimental plaything of the godhead, i would withhold from them the
knowledge of the higher state of good and evil, and i would bind them
in to a phase of life having a gentle end.'

"thus much vestasian in simple words and few, a mixture of kindness and
pride, and an indulgence which lacked wisdom, having nothing higher for
its aim than a semblance of what was not.

"next, michael rose—he is held to be among the wisest of the wise.
you must know that in the spirit world there are two great powers or
principles—good and evil. every higher spirit is built up of either
of these two, yet not the most keen-sighted can tell which is which
till a difference arises, for in reality both are just alike, and only
external and the weaker things can ever feel the different effects.
take for example plucritus and myself; we are the same in everything
except principle—that unreal thing which looks like a shadow but can
alter everything. yet he and i were the greatest friends together,
following the same pursuits, interested by the same things, till the
great argument arose. one might have thought this mutual fellow-feeling
that pervaded all of us would have broken down all obstacles. but
not so. it has always been the case in every constellation. the two
powers, so similar at first, break apart at last, each understanding
but not being the other. yet each is necessary to the other, the two
great principles that sway back and forwards and keep the balance even.
for evil, as you think of evil on the earth, is but a relative and
comparative thing, and not understanding it the earth looks down on it,
which is another jest. for evil is as pure as good, as simple as good,
as true as good, as beautiful and equal, the only difference being
that its influence on things weaker than itself is to lower instead of
raise.

"when michael rose there was as deep a silence as for vestasian, and he
argued thus.

"he said that in the main he agreed with what had just been stated, but
pointed out what an aimless existence man must lead, being born but for
a short life of pleasure and beauty, and given enough spirit to enjoy
and then to lose. he pointed out the great spiritual waste it would
necessitate, since no result of any magnitude would be obtained from it.

"‘not so,' argued vestasian. ‘whatever effort they are able in
themselves to accomplish successfully will return to us for our use, to
make what we like out of this new experiment, which could not fail to
produce some fruits worthy our gathering.'

"‘ignorance never yet produced anything but—' began the other.

"‘but sin,' plucritus put in, so quietly that but for the intense
silence it would have been lost even on those who sat beside him.

"then all eyes were turned to him.

"i am ignorant, he said, looking at michael. ‘i would hear more.'

"thus asked, michael unfolded his project.

"‘i hold with vestasian,' he declared, ‘that man's life should be as
happy as our own. but i would give him that wisdom which vestasian
would take away. i would give him the power to obtain the knowledge of
good and evil, by patient striving to raise himself from the inanimate
laws of nature to the pure rays that have their central light in us.
that surely would be our greatest recompense to nature, to quicken
into spirit what has been raised from earth and dust and material
substance.'

"this was the wisest and the greatest plan—or seemed to be—to
let mankind learn by effort and endeavour to reach with purity the
highest—to withhold nothing from man, yet to grant nothing till he had
found it.

"then asked plucritus:—

"‘and in this striving after wisdom, which side must the choice fall?'

"‘it may fall either—he is given a free will.'

"‘is this race of men then to rival and outshine ourselves, that it may
pick and choose betwixt us?'

"you will understand there was nothing but truth and purity and beauty
in his words. he spoke as god despising propositions, not as man
striving against his brother man.

"‘when man has once discovered good and evil he will be as god,'
michael replied.

"for some space of time there was silence, till at last plucritus rose.

"‘i would not willingly detain you, but this project seems to me
absurd. to build up with nature's aid beings like ourselves! nature,
who never saw us, but followed blindly on the guiding principles that
we laid down! can anything exist that has not built itself? what is
our strength and beauty but that we raised ourselves and now maintain
ourselves as becomes true spirits? what weaklings would you introduce
and draw towards us? what do we need with outside sycophants? are
we dull and life grows wearisome, we can change, as often in the past.
but you are not dull. you are striving to break the bond of friendship,
as it has been broken in so many spheres before mere trifle, an
introduction of an alien element. vestasian seeks to give pleasure to
an inferior race. give it and make them happy. let them be thankful.
spare them the pain that runs in other orbits, for history repeats
itself, and as in other places _choose evil they shall not_, and
who can then choose good?'

"‘why not?' asked vestasian, who had listened earnestly.

"‘it does away with the free will,' plucritus answered, and laughed.

"after that there was much argument, and gradually the rift began to
grow and widen, and we discovered too late, or not too late, that it
had been caused among us by the little biped—man.

"so often do little things produce great strife and suffering.

"thus it grew to a point of great dispute whether humanity was to have
a free will or no, whether it was to receive gifts without striving
and return them or to strive for wisdom, and in acquiring it gain
everything. and after all, like all really little things, it was a
great one. it affects us more nearly than even the wisest foresaw. it
meant giving up so much, even of our own bodies, and entailed suffering
and concentration of thought and purpose which happily by our nature
adds to our strength and beauty and never takes away.

"presently the conversation ended with courtesy as deep as that which
started it. yet we were no longer quite the same. friends to ourselves,
yet differing on one point, which, being nature's pinnacle, was an
important one, needing consideration. war had been declared, that
difference of opinion which always ends in it, and they were first in
the field.

"for, rising up from sleep one morning, we beheld a difference in the
spheres, visible only to the spirits' eye. not all were changed, but
many; and one, your little earth, i will describe. round it shone a
mist, so delicately wrapped that it gave it quite a beauty of its
own. this was the wreath of mystery. we knew it well, and because its
mystery was mysterious we approached and floated through its wide
expanse to reach the earth—when suddenly we came upon a chain that
bound the whole sphere round and stopped our passage. it was like an
iron network, yet very fine and pliable like a fisherman's. i, for one,
cut the net and descended. it was very easy work, though it closed over
our heads when we were through. earth was no different from what it had
ever seemed. no life was yet apparent on it. that followed.

"there was nothing there to be discovered; beyond the mist and chain
things were as usual. at our next convocation this change was mentioned.

"they had seized the earth and other spheres, which henceforth belonged
to them until such time as they cared to give them up.

"i had scarcely seen vestasian in more excellent humour than on that
day.

"‘we have considered your plans well,' said he, ‘and have decided
that after all a free will is the best thing for man. he shall choose
betwixt good and evil, and shall receive whate'er his choice may fall
to. if evil, then he shall reap the fruits of evil. if good, then
you must see to it. we have decided to make man in our own image;
allowing, of course for some slight divergences of nature, who, not
comprehending us to the full, cannot draw us altogether truthfully,
yet the likeness shall be such that all can tell it. we intend to
make them also male and female, so that they will be blessed even as
ourselves and rank themselves our equals. moreover, we invite you to
behold and criticise our labours, which, though poor, are the nearest
reflection of your own that we could find. our system is comprehensive,
it includes everything.'

"‘therefore,' remarked plucritus, looking towards me, ‘you will, of
course, expect to find it very muddled.'

"‘let me ask one question,' i broke in. ‘does your system embrace
physical decay and death?'

"‘why, yes,' vestasian answered. ‘of course. it is necessary in order
to prevent overcrowding. moreover, we have tried to combine your system
with our own, and death would have been a phase in any case.'

"‘yes,' i argued. ‘but there is death and death.'

"‘what matter?' said he. ‘you will soon find the pathway glutted, for
all will crowd towards it, choosing by free will good rather than evil.'

"then vestasian, still laughing, rose to leave the assembly.

"‘i am still a single spirit,' he observed. ‘more lonely than most, yet
still quite content. when from earth a female spirit is raised pure
enough and wise enough to aspire unto the godhead, i will marry her and
admit that a free will is not a bad thing—even in woman.'

"and with that he went away, and all remaining laughed.

"from that time forward the jest rolled onward, for to vestasian and
those like him it was nothing better than a jest, nor ever has been.
they have fought and been obliged to suffer, even as we, because the
spiritual warfare is incessant.

"we were in a perfect mystery about the earth. beyond its shape and
natural organism we knew nothing further of it.

"gradually as the ages went by we discovered signs of life there. from
this, in time, insects sprang, and hideous monsters and huge animals,
and on all this we were obliged to keep incessant and untiring watch to
discover when man first made his entry. this, as you know, was not for
long, long ages. we touched first here and there on every animal, but
found none sensitive: none responded in any way, and the rays slipped
blunted aside."

"but could you not tell from his appearance?" i asked, interrupting for
the first time.

"no. there was no garden of eden as the bible has it. that garden of
eden might have been, and was not. it was vestasian's dream. man was
no different from the other animals when we found him; the mysterious
jewel was hidden underneath unknown to us.

"one day one of our number had sent a shaft of light on to an animal
more hideous than most, or so it seemed to us. there was no response,
but as the shaft glanced aside it struck another of the same class
lying near. the effect was very unexpected, though slight and
momentary; the creature trembled. having notified this much, another
ray was directed full on this, a cry of pain followed. that was a
surprise, a very sad one, because this was healing light. here then we
had found the first little clue to the great secret of humanity. the
powers of hell laughed when they heard that cry, laughed when they saw
our pained surprise. they had understood and waited for it. this that
the ray had pierced was a woman. well might vestasian's words call up a
smile, for it was a thing devoid of beauty or intellect or grace. and
that from which the ray had glinted aside was her husband—man.

"but the first ray had struck home at last—the battle had at last
begun. each side had to prepare for the long fight, in which the atom
of humanity turned the scale of equal-balanced powers. and so because
woman was the first to receive what man could not understand it came
about that he looked down on her, and treated her with contempt as a
household drudge and worse. it was but another little jest of the great
powers of evil, turning all good to their own account, and instead of
woman becoming the acknowledged influence to lead man to higher things,
she sank under the stronger power of evil for the most part, and
delivered up the tiny ray of light to him—second-hand as it were, like
the apple in the garden. it was but natural. the strongest gained and
the weak went to the wall.

"but gradually, as century followed century in endless routine, the
change began to show itself. true, every weapon of ours was met by a
counter weapon from our brother spirits, yet slowly, inch by inch, the
great fight was fought, the mystery unfolded.

"and at last intellect broke on cunning. intellect is not a gift of
ours. it comes from the other side. it was forced on them by us,
though, since they did not give it till it could act as a slur to
our teaching. wisdom they have never given; it comes from us alone.
still for all that our progress was slow and uncertain. in the first
place, we could not tell what had attracted humanity to us, because in
structure they were but little different from the other animals—at one
time not at all. it took long ages to solve the riddle, and it occupied
the undivided attention of some of our wisest spirits.

"at last we discovered that the nucleus of each was a spiritual jewel
set like a skeleton of empty cells. these cells, in the early ages,
must always have remained empty, for otherwise they would have become
noticeable, which they were not. but as the ages passed away we began
to find that in some cases some of these cells at least were filling.
it was a very wonderful structure, though simple. every cell was
bound to be filled with one of two things (if it filled at all)—good
or evil. this was the soul—the thing that man has talked about so
greatly, the thing for which we fight and which is so precious to us,
forming our brightest jewels, and the seeds from which the after life
is sown. when the soul is pure and free from every stain we receive
it into our own spiritual bodies when death steals on the flesh. and
as the father of the spirit we form those seeds within ourselves to
our own natures. then from us they pass into the essence of spiritual
love and light, the purest element of spirit; such as my wife. and
these are those gracious, loving mothers, without whose sweet care
and love and wisdom in building up such tender life our labours would
be lost. since at the best the soul is but a crude thing, even when
purest, as compared with things of heaven, and of itself would die
and never germinate, having no strength to form itself. indeed, who
ever yet, however free from sin, felt themselves fit to step from
earth to heaven even by death? for the long rest must come—the pure
cleansing, the healing strength, the quickening spirit—to drive away
the harshness and the shadow.

"but i have made a digression to explain. i must return to the earth's
history. i said our progress was slow and uncertain; but in eternity
the time goes by without respect to feeling, it neither drags nor
quickens. hundreds, nay, thousands of years elapsed before we could
make our power felt at all. the earth could not understand us. it was
wrapped in the veil of mystery and the chain of slavery, and was blind
and deaf to all influence from without. we were alien to it—strangers,
ignorant, and, by the law of conquest, weak, for the world was not
our own. moreover, as you will perceive if you care to look into its
history, the whole thing reads more or less as a farce, a jest of the
godhead, as indeed it was.

"whenever good rose up it was rejected, scorned, despised and mocked
till it grew old, and then respectability being born with age it was
received and converted into evil. good men died, egged on by screeching
multitudes to death, themselves egged on by devils of inferior order,
who had chosen evil rather than good. and there the farce and tragedy
were again repeated. they rewarded evil with the effects of evil—as
they said—bringing about all that torture and disrupture of the
spirit, which, like the undying worm the saviour spoke of, must writhe
and twine until its appointed day. moreover, this suffering and this
great curse are due to us, they say. for had we been content to let man
live his length of days without knowledge of good or evil, he would
never have known pain, and passed away in happiness like summer mist.

"at last we made an agreement at another conference, and it was this.

"we had known that as years rolled by and the empty cells became
capable of being filled they had on death descended to hell, there to
be emptied or built into hideous shape according to their fulness. now
we demanded that each soul not completely given up to evil (or almost
so) might, when emptied, return again to earth, for on some our light
had shone, and it meant that this last ray went to swell the enemy's
spoils and weakened us, since it was giving up part of our being. they
agreed to this, and then the after suffering began. hell, previously,
had been but the dark shadow, except to those trained to its menial
service, who had wilfully steeped themselves in sin and shame.

"it was a bold, it may seem a cruel stroke, as it had taken us long
to fathom this little riddle of growing evolution. heaven is often
depicted as a land of endless hallelujahs, but some of us have no taste
that way. it needs an absorbing genius of wisdom (which is simplicity)
even to understand it. and presently, after these years of failure
and disappointment, another little step to success was reached. in
hell they give devil's medicine and devil's punishment. and it is an
excellent cure of its kind. they never punish lightly. if a thing is
worth punishing they punish, if not they let it pass, to the winds,
perhaps, if it is no use. and so those souls which had to be reclaimed,
redeemed if you like it better, suffered their punishment and then
returned for the second time to earth. but the cloud of mystery again
surrounded them. they remembered, yet remembered not. they were, and
are, those more sensitive and higher natures for which the world can
often not account. they have had a forgotten experience, whose effects
in part remain.

"and it was with these that our best work was done; unless when they
dispatched them from their prison they wrought in them a gift. and
then the task was well-nigh hopeless. for they felt the presence of
the godhead in themselves and were blinded by the mist. they longed
for something higher to respond to themselves, and on the dull cramped
earth could find nothing, because the gift had not come from us. but if
they sought and strove to find the light we ne'er withheld from any,
then they became our truest servants, and the gift given in hell came
to heaven and distinguished good from evil as it were, and dwelt with
us.

"the first souls that came to heaven capable of bearing life-forming
seeds had undergone this pre-experience. they were few, very few, as
you will understand, and not often those which the world would think
would arrive there. they were the weak and helpless, the suffering and
the patient, who had learnt from the past and present to stand what
others could never tamely undergo. they needed above all the spirit
of endurance, and all these things are wonderfully well learnt in
hell—they are remembered even when forgotten, in the hour of need.
my wife ursula was one these. a noble spirit with great faults tamed
in hell and sent again on to earth to suffer in the hour of need. she
was one of our first children. i remember the great rejoicing when
she was born, and how all gathered round to see a result which all
had striven for from time scarce countable. and as i stooped to kiss
the baby fingers i felt them clasp unconsciously around my own, and
ever afterwards i stood by her through the great weakness and the
after-strength that ends the long journey.

"but our progress on the earth was very slow. we had no bribes to
offer, nothing to give but a purity and simplicity they could not
understand. for, as you know, the earth is tawdry and gaudy, and the
devils who tempted it understood its littleness and mediocrity well.
and here you will understand that those tempting devils are not the
great powers of evil. i do not know that those great powers have ever
once put temptation in the way of man. they punish and give pain, but
for the rest, knowing well man's nature, they leave things to his
weakness and ignorance and the slave spirits that work to ruin him for
their own ends. and man, left to himself, understands the powers of
evil no better than those of good. by a remarkably whimsical reasoning,
which is his chief characteristic, he put evil one lower than good,
because somehow, by a very muddled yet ironically truthful process, he
has come blindly to understand that good will help and evil hinder him.
and as, with natural conceit, he imagined all things were made for him
to pick and choose, he lauded his benefactor, and spoke of the rival
power as inferior, and grovelling under a fairly long and loose chain
of thraldom. but god is god, whether of evil or of good—like action
and re-action—equal and opposite.

"i have said that we had nothing to offer humanity. the world did not
belong to us, and therefore no pleasure nor greatness that it could
give could come from us. but nobility and purity and strength of
character had grown up even in this poor soil, as i have shown.

"and then at last the greatest riddle of all was solved—the riddle
of human nature. you will perhaps think it was a ridiculously long
time to have spent upon so simple a thing. the length of time and the
simplicity are equal. we discovered if we were to act with humanity we
must suffer with it, feel with it, be of it—in fact, take its nature
upon ourselves. it was, or seemed to be, a step of utter humiliation
and shame. i remember the time when the discovery was made—the silence
that came after it. before, we had always felt a certain amount of joy
and triumph, but now that had gone. but because we had given the word
of god to uplift humanity, it could not be broken, nor would we have
wished to if we could. we wished to save and raise the many, not the
few; and the word ‘impossible' was unknown to us. the powers of evil
laughed, as well they might. this was the most exquisite jest of all.
if we would drag humanity up to us we must first descend to it, not
in condescension and superiority but in equality—not even that. but
there could be no dallying nor shirking by delay. our plan was now to
see how the great work could be accomplished. it must be done secretly,
the introduction of pure light and godhead on to earth, or otherwise it
would meet with ineffectual defeat, and the chance once lost would pass
for ever. about this time there was born to me a daughter. she was our
first-born child, and it seemed to my fond eyes i had never yet beheld
anything so fair and lovely. i used to watch her as she played about
the house, and she it was who drew me nearer to the earth—since she
had sprung from it by much trial and tribulation.

"but as she grew the question grew, how to descend unknown to touch the
nature of humanity.

"then each spirit of heaven brought some pure essence of his own
body, and the whole was compressed to a seed so small as to be near
invisible. and it was this one seed that, coming from us and returning
to us, made us at one, or seemingly at one, with man.

"the greatest of our sages then were gathered to see how this fine seed
could be translated to the earth effectively and secretly, for its
presence was traceable but to the blind. at last michael counselled
thus:—

"‘if we send it by one who is as innocent of its presence as of sin or
harm we may expect success. none act so well as those free from all
taint of deception and pre-arranged thought.'

"and the lot fell upon my daughter.

"she was but a tender spirit, not half formed in strength—never having
taken the long journey that completes and perfects the strength to that
of highest god. she had nothing but her own sweet graces and winning
perfection of beauty; not a fit thing to be left alone in any place
of danger. moreover, she had had no experience of anything beyond our
home, and all her days had been spent in singing about the house, and
working, and studying such things as were suitable to her age and
understanding.

"with no ostentation we saw her leave heaven and hover into space.

"as she had slept the night before we had placed the seed within her
bosom, and she, unconscious, smiled and clasped my fingers in her hand
as once her mother did when quite a child. we saw her go, and all
heaven watched in silence, and she went smiling, not understanding why
she went, but as some passing pleasure of the hour.

"then there happened one of those unforeseen things that alter
everything. by utter chance it happened that that day vestasian had
visited the earth, and as he flew up above the chain and mist he saw
this lovely vision hovering there.

"he was surprised, no doubt, to see anything so weak and defenceless
near that great battlefield. and she, not knowing friend from enemy,
and feeling lonely in the great waste, drew towards him.

"and then began that which i told you of the other day. it was a case
of hardness and strength trying to absorb softness and no strength—for
that was what our daughter lacked. the only lasting and eternal
strength within her was that which i had given, won from the earth.
but at times, most curiously, there is strength in utter weakness, for
vestasian, acting on the impulse of the moment, despising and laughing
at this weakness, caught her—and then was caught. for she had no
strength to resist his all-absorbing strength; he no weakness with
which to resist weakness. almost within the instant they were joined—a
union so perfect that it became imperfect, seeing it lacked one great
element to keep the balance even. and so, in innocence, she went
with him to hell; and at last the marriage had taken place, the one
of which he spoke long since in jest. but as time went on, having on
earth chosen good and not evil, and finding no principle of good among
these strangers she sickened, and at last died. all but those seeds of
life and a frail skeleton of grace and beauty left her and passed to
vestasian, the only dowry she took to him—her life. yet one thing she
had hidden until the end—which only parted from her with her life—and
that was our great secret, the seed of god to be imparted to humanity.

"and on the night she died and passed away from hell, drawn by the
power of god again to heaven, she went with him to see the lost souls
pray, and sang a song so sweet, so full of love and purity and light,
that one would have thought the very walls might have melted into tears
and gentleness. but not so those poor prisoners bound in darkness.
they heard, yet could not hear, except for one tired, weary, worn-out
soul whose term of prison life was over. he heard and soared with the
last flicker of life towards the dying angel, and she, with that sweet
thankfulness for trifles which always went with her, received this one
as a gift most precious and clasped it to her bosom. the act was just
in time, the mighty, hidden light she carried in her had passed beyond
her feeble strength. from her it passed into the innermost cell of that
soul cleansed by the fire of hell to an apparent newness.

"and vestasian, blind with love, and blind with grief at the sad
parting, which even he could scarcely understand, never noticed
anything amiss, and let her return to me, who waited to carry her back
to life and light. then, as we passed the earth, we laid this soul,
with its unconscious burden, within the lowly manger. vestasian saw,
yet saw not—neither did any of them at the time. and this pure virgin
mother came back to heaven, and slept again the long, long sleep, and
when she rose, refreshed and strengthened, stayed with us till she went
again to him. and in the meantime, as the saviour's life advanced,
they saw that we had solved their riddle, and recognised the part my
daughter, purity, had played in it.

"you remember well his life, of utter strength and utter weakness, the
finest tragedy that e'er was played upon the earth.

"surely then you yourself can read the rest. we, who had so humbled
ourselves to send of our inmost being to the earth, were met with
scoffs and laughter, misunderstood, and the outward sign of our
presence, the body of jesus, spat at and humbled to the very dust.

*       *       *       *       *

_several passages omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"when jesus of nazareth died, the christ spirit which was in him
returned to us from whom it passed. it entered into us and brought
us more in sympathy with man, to understand him better, feel his
suffering and temptation, a thing before almost unknown to us except
in the abstract theory. but his soul was a thing as other souls, the
seed properly sown from which mankind may rise to heaven. so his soul
entered into the body of the spiritual father who had ever stood by
him in silence, waiting the last sad gasp of pain. and now you see
him, the heavenly likeness of that earthly substance, glorified and
beautified and turned to god.

"and she, the virgin mother, still returns to hell, and when she
carries souls away with her endows them with what graces lie in her
power, which then is very feeble. and now they can no more suspect her,
for the great seed has gone forth and returned, whatever its effects
have been and are upon the earth.

"and now i have told you the story of the earth's evolution as
truthfully and as shortly as i can. to show you how it sprang from
evil and not from good, to show how it was born in blind mystery and
chains, the sport and cruel pastime of the godhead, a mixture of jest
and warfare, an intertwining of truth and error, so interlaced that
each was truth and no truth, error and no error at a time. i could tell
you more, but time is quickly gone and we must go. you have listened
patiently. would that others would do so too." and here he ceased.

i had listened as one in an enchanted forest. round us as he spoke the
soft faint light had drawn as in a circle, its outer rims spreading
in varied colours far out among the trees. from the deep lake near by
came the legend song of the dying swan, filling the air with sadness.
at times the nightingale warbled rich and full and then was silent, and
the owl ever sent its eerie cry down the glades, sad and lonely, yet
with no harsh note to break the saddened charm.

and so we went away, back through the forest to the silent city, and
though it was night, and nature's darkness closed around it, i had
never seen a more dazzling sight.

chapter viii

next day i went to visit a painter, adrian, and he took me to an inner
studio where he kept some of his favourite works, and at last he stayed
before a white curtain, soft as velvet and as pure as mountain mist,
and drew it gently backward.

"this is my masterpiece," said he, and stepped back smiling gravely.

i looked and saw a face unseen before that had haunted me all my life
though till this day unknown.

he drew the curtain back long before i had had my fill of gazing at it.

"silence is better than applause," he said, and put his hand upon my
arm and moved away.

"who is it?" i asked at last.

"that is purity, vestasian's wife, the virgin mother of the god in man."

"she is more beautiful than all in heaven."

he stopped and looked at me and shook his head and smiled.

"not more beautiful, a little different, that is all. a little
tenderer, a little weaker, a little quieter, at times a little gayer,
at others a little more afraid of pain, and that is all."

i stayed with him all the morning, and in the afternoon went to see
philemon.

he dwelt on the other side of the river, and lived there very happily,
and sunbeam and moonbeam, who often used to go to have tea with him,
always came back with wonderful accounts of what they had seen and
heard and done. this afternoon i found him busy preparing medicines
and consulting every now and then a large book, which he had compiled
himself from his own investigations. but for all that he was willing
enough that i should join him, though he still continued his work at
odd intervals. i sat in the large open window and looked down on the
river. it was very bright and full of life down there. pleasure barges
and swift canoes glided up and down the water, others walked upon its
shining ripples, and every now and then a form would rise from it and
shake the dashing spray far off in every direction.

at last philemon threw aside his work and joined me there.

"you were up late last night," he said.

"yes. i went with virginius to the forest and he gave me an historical
outline of the earth."

"did it interest you?"

"very much. it accounts for a great deal which i did not understand
before."

he looked at me.

"i thought your experience was a large one," he remarked.

"i used to think so myself," i admitted, laughing. "but lately i have
come to the conclusion i know very little of what i thought i knew, so
have altered my opinion."

"you have been in hell?"

"undoubtedly. that was another surprise for me. it was so different
from what i thought."

"are you quite sure you have never been there before?" he asked
suddenly, and turned upon me a pair of eyes so scrutinising that,
despite myself, i smiled.

"i'm sure of nothing, but i have no recollection of it."

"i mean, you have never been there and found it as enjoyable as heaven."

it was my turn now to return the stare.

"what do you mean?" i queried.

"i wish to know where you came from."

"i am perfectly ignorant. if you wished me to find the way back to the
place from whence i came i could not do so. i lived in a world at the
other side of the magic mirror, and one day the mirror cracked and
shivered from side to side and i alighted without premeditation on the
earth, not even in my own habiliments but some which i borrowed for
a masquerade. and being caught and taken seriously as a thief, and
meeting with no intelligent person sharp enough to understand my case,
i was branded forthwith and dispatched post haste to hell."

"you are sure this world you spoke of was not given you by vestasian?"

"pardon me, i was not even king there."

he laughed.

"did you enjoy life?"

"why, yes. it was surprising the amount of evil one could bring about
in a day and yet be entirely innocent oneself."

he looked at me.

"ah! be careful, genius. you are giving yourself away. that is
vestasian's peculiarity. were you at all well acquainted with
plucritus?"

"why, yes. before i was dropped willy-nilly in the little farm he and
i were very friendly. he was such excellent company."

"and virginius—had you known him?"

"yes, but i never understood him. he had a way of looking which was
very puzzling, almost annoying. moreover, he persisted in acting as if
i had lived for ever, a phase of existence i do not remember at all."

"and vestasian?"

"i never saw him till i went to hell."

"never saw him?"

"never."

"but you are very like him."

"i can account for that. i took to staring at him on a bridge at
midnight; the likeness must have grown from that."

"you are not speaking seriously."

"indeed i am."

"tell me of your father and mother."

but i shook my head.

"indeed, i would rather not. i am not at all fond of speaking of
myself, though by a strange irony it never may appear so."

"what may not appear so?"

the words caused us to look towards the door, and there, just within
it, stood vestasian—the subject of philemon's doubts and fears.

we were neither of us surprised. vestasian never did surprise people
because he surprised them so completely. and i for one was pleased to
see him because he had always interested me, and because he was the
only one for whom i had entertained any fear.

as i went to greet him i noticed again the sweetness of his face and
the hardness; one seemed to cover the other like a mask. his was a face
which some, to pride themselves on far-seeing, would say they could not
trust, but then i don't think he ever had any ambition to be trusted.

"you are pleased to see me, genius," he said, coming forward. "we
did not take an affectionate leave of one another—it was rather too
unexpected and too hasty. who would have thought the last time i saw
you you were bound that night for heaven?"

"no, indeed. i had expected perfect annihilation or a second phase of
hell."

he looked at me.

"you are looking much stronger than when i saw you last," he observed.

"i find the society of heaven more congenial."

without answering he went to a sofa, the only thing of luxury in the
room, and threw himself down among the cushions and clasped his hands
above his head.

all this time philemon had been watching him from the window. he had
not risen from his seat there, but apparently had not objected to the
interruption.

vestasian lying there looked the very picture of luxurious ease.
beautiful he was without a doubt, the kind of beauty that grows on one
the more one sees it.

"which of us have you come to see?" asked philemon at length, seeing
the conversation had suddenly come to a standstill.

"both of you. you have no objection, philemon?"

"none. why have you come?"

"i have come for no particular reason. time was dragging on my hands,
which is a new experience for me, or perhaps my wife is growing ill and
longs for the edelweiss of heaven."

"i never saw her after all," i said.

"no. philemon, why do you look at me with such a disagreeable
minuteness?"

"i am trying to solve what relationship genius bears to you."

"you had best put it under a microscope."

"is it so small then?"

"undoubtedly. what relationship should he bear to me? he has come from
earth, a place i never visit."

"i noticed such a strong likeness i imagined there must be some
relationship."

"a strong likeness," cried vestasian in a voice as hard and cold as his
face had suddenly grown, and he gazed over at me probably to discover
the resemblance.

"you need not think the distaste is all one-sided," i observed. "you
are the last person in the universe i have the least ambition to be
like."

"then it gives me the greatest pleasure in the universe to believe in
the resemblance. why do you object to me? but rather let us change the
conversation, it is personal and therefore unpleasant. do you deal much
in cocaine, philemon?"

"no, i have no such thing in my laboratory."

"come, come, i have known you administer a dose."

"indeed not. i never give any strong medicine in more than one
dose—and the effect is lasting. the effects of cocaine, as you know,
pass away."

vestasian smiled.

"yes. all too truly. but do you really mean to say you never give more
than one dose of a strong medicine? surely the effects cannot last for
ever."

"they last a pretty sure length anyway. that's the difference, you
know, between the real thing and a sham."

"plucritus is at home ill, suffering from a wound," vestasian went on,
turning to me.

"indeed. that will be a new experience for him," i suggested.

"oh, no. not at all. he and virginius, as a rule, manage to keep fairly
even."

"i should think as an invalid he would be rather unmanageable."

"not at all. only, he has one peculiarity. when he is ill he will have
no physician, however experienced and wise. he will have no one but
vestné to wait on him."

"and is she a good nurse?"

"oh! capital. almost as good as i am."

"have you a gift that way?"

"of course. with a wife as ailing as mine it is necessary i know
something about such things."

"yet you are not clever enough to keep her alive." i repented the words
as soon as said, there was such a clumsy want of feeling about them.

he looked at me and passed his hand before his mouth.

"no, i am not clever enough for that," he remarked quietly.

"which way did you come?" philemon asked.

"i came direct from hell and caught a glimpse of earth as i passed. you
may be thankful you are out of it, genius; those who dispatched you did
the greatest kindness. i find earth depressing, i never wish to stay
there."

"if it depresses you, why do you not tear away the chain and the mist?"

he shook his head, then smiled.

"we have given humanity a free will, which is gift enough of its kind.
if they wish to tear away the chain and grope through the mist to the
light, all well and good, but we will raise neither hand nor foot to
help them. because, after all, if heaven is worth winning it is worth
fighting for and struggling for. we have little sympathy with those who
would walk in in respectable dignity and comfort. man, by a perfect
irony, has been born to walk upright, but if he arrives at heaven it is
generally by crawling on all fours."

"you do not grudge them heaven, then, if they attain it?"

"not at all. though we often maintain the contest to the last hour.
look at philemon here. on the earth he was a little shoemaker who died
in consumption. he had a nagging wife and two children to support. i
think if i remember rightly he was only in bed three days before he
died, and the smell of leather is not pleasant. now that is what i
call a hero, for he never complained, and was so humble as to imagine
himself no better than those around him; indeed, if anything, he
imagined himself inferior by his lack of physical strength."

philemon took this sketch of himself as unconcernedly as if he had been
an outsider.

"and what has become of her—his wife?" i asked, grieving that he
should have been thus long a spiritual bachelor.

"well, you see, she was put there as a thorn in the flesh to aggravate
and hinder him. there was a time when she did do so, but he got the
better of it, though not of her. she had no real soul, you see; the
cells were empty—it was a sham one. a little structure of nature that
the flesh had grown over, and which a narrow intellect, or rather
understanding, had killed at the birth."

"what became of her?"

"i don't know. she wasn't bad enough for hell, i think. oh, no. she
died out."

the most curious part about this discovery was to see philemon sitting
there listening with a face extremely serious, but not sad.

"you do not grieve for the loss of your wife?" said i.

here vestasian laughed outright.

"oh, no. he was not among the converted nor those who came to the lord.
at least, he is not now, whatever he may have been then. you see, no
one in heaven grieves over the loss of sham souls. they are the coarse,
low, cramped natures that never probably show it on the outside, that
are put into the world to act as stumbling-blocks to others. it is
only on the earth that sentimental grief and prayer are attached to
them. they are all so wishful to make converts and draw sinners to
christ. why it would be hard to say. they forget that people like mary
magdalene, whom they are so fond of quoting, went to him of herself and
needed no external urging. no. neither in heaven nor hell do we grieve
over the loss of sham souls; they are simply useful in their effects on
other people."

"then surely they should not be tolerated."

vestasian smiled.

"your schools are conducted on a wrong principle, as are so many of
your homes. your punishments are not strong enough, your prisons are
too full. but if i talk thus i will help to drive the cloud away, which
will almost make of me a traitor."

"not it," cried philemon, laughing. "you put it there between you, but
it sticks by the law of gravity, which has not yet learned to smile
without becoming irreverent."

"i suppose then you would teach pure morality and leave out religion,"
i said.

"it would be best," philemon declared.

"ssh! ssh! don't rouse the clergy," vestasian exclaimed.

"why not? i could say the project came from hell."

"certainly."

*       *       *       *       *

_passage omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

"you see," said philemon, after a pause, "faith springs from true
morality, but it does not spring up with it. if a man is moral simply
because he is religious he is but a weakling, needing a crutch to lean
against. he should be moral out of respect for his brother man, a pure
feeling to lead a clean life, because it is right, without hope of
reward or glamour of future glorification. and as long as the church
tries to force the two into the same channel it is but a failure,
whatever it may appear on the outside."

"well, of course," affirmed vestasian, indulgently. "but what can you
expect on the earth? they muddle things so. for one thing, they are
always trying to confound flesh and the spirit, pretty much as they
confound their religion and morality. but flesh is flesh, and spirit
will be spirit, if they howl and pray over it from now till domesday.
what could be more amusing than to listen to the man who says grace
at meal-times? he returns thanks to my side of the godhead for giving
him the fruits of our little serfdom, earth. he knows the world and
all upon it belongs to us; the bible tells him so if he will read it,
and the catechism too. but though he reads he's stubborn and won't
understand. he returns thanks for his food, whereas we don't care a jot
whether its well cooked or ill. now, if he would simply take it with
contentment and enjoyment, and be ready for poorer fare next day if it
came his way, he'd show some sense. and if by saying grace he thinks he
pleases such as virginius and the rest, how far from the mark is he!
they are as callous about his appetite as we ourselves, and only drop
an unavailing tear when he eats or drinks too much.

"then again there is the marriage service, and the baptismal service,
and all the rest, except the burial service. forever trying to put
the spirit first and the flesh second, and gradually to draw a pretty
tight slip o'er them both, with spirit uppermost so that the flesh is
comfortably hidden underneath. all this for respectability, which is
the devil's sham ermine cloak, as civilisation is his sham gold crown."

"yes, but you know if the world loses respectability it takes on the
other thing," philemon remarked.

"i know. thereby testifying to its own depravity. now for my part, the
people on earth i most admire are those who have lost respectability
and found something truer and deeper."

"vestasian," said philemon, "you must cease, or you will be becoming,
as you said—a traitor."

he threw his head back on the pillow.

"i am excusable. when i am in heaven i feel for the time as those in
heaven. and after all, it is not my fault that the earth is as it is.
i came almost to the level of neutrality but was bound to take a side,
and got pushed by an unforeseen event to the apex."

"tell me further of philemon," said i.

"what of him? there is nothing further to tell, except that he has done
his little toward keeping others out of heaven."

"how so?"

"well, the people who patronised him and had their shoes charitably
repaired at his little shed naturally would not care to associate with
him here any more than on the earth. they would say he smelled of
leather and begged to be excused. they might join the elements with
his wife, or come to the exclusive cells of hell. but to get there one
needs a rather higher order of character. it isn't every duffer who
gets to us any more than to heaven."

"i agree with you."

"you see," he went on dreamily, his voice having sunk to a sweet
monotone, "every man worth calling a man, or woman for that matter,
has his little back parlour. some call it their conscience. it's a
little empty dark place at first with no real light in it, for the
backyard wall is very high. and after a time furniture begins to appear
in it. an armchair grows—a kind of dentist arrangement, which brings
no comfort when he sits in it. and then a table, which holds just the
little things he doesn't want to see. the carpet is nothing but a
worn-out mat that shews strange stains upon the floor. and then there
is the cupboard. he keeps the door shut if he can. the shelves are
so dusty, the smell so musty, the skeleton so real. and the fire is
a very funny fire. in winter the flames are icy cold and freeze the
marrow of his bones, and in summer the fire is still there, raging hot
and strong. it's a very shabby little back parlour, even though it
is built in the centre of a king's palace. and the owner isn't fond
of going into it—because there's nothing there of which he can be
proud. moreover, he can never take anyone in with him, not even his
wife—there's only room for one. besides, if he could get his wife in
it wouldn't be a back parlour any longer. it would be a little homely
kitchen—the sweetest of all things. besides, she has her little back
parlour too, and perhaps all her time is spent in trying to sweep away
the cobwebs that will not go. and all through life the little parlour
remains, and as much as possible they keep out of it and try to think
it isn't there. and then one of two things will happen. one day he will
go into this little cell and pat all in order and dust it to the best
of his poor ability, and then he will sit down and wait, and the pure
light will shine and the back parlour will become a shadow—a memory of
the past instead of a reality. or otherwise he will go there and find,
alas! that the door is closed upon him and he cannot get out. and no
light has entered, nor ever will enter, as far as he can see. he won't
know where he is. he'll imagine it's a long dream of endless night, for
after awhile he will forget where the door is and lose the power to
want to get out. and he will have nothing to look at but the cupboard
and the table—nothing to feel but the fire, nothing to rest on but
the chair. and then in the long, long end, when it's all over, he'll
come back on the earth if his soul has been bargained for. and if he
was a prince before he may now be a beggar; and if a beggar formerly,
now a prince. nature will give his flesh the hapsburg lip or bourbon
nose—it will not alter his soul. and then the next battle begins with
different flesh in other surroundings, and he stands his chance again.
and some people are not conscious of any back parlours, and they are
those curious people born with the sham soul. and many who would like
to be without the little shabby chamber are all too conscious that it's
there."

we had listened to the musical rhythm of his voice throughout, and i
for one had felt its truth, and philemon was more deeply moved than i.

"vestasian," he said, "why do you come here to tell us such things? you
have almost made me feel myself on earth again."

but vestasian rose, laughing.

"it's a queer knack i have of getting low-spirited at times—it is
natural to me—and is never more than a passing whim—no weakness, as
in mortals. come with me to see jesus."

*       *       *       *       *

_two pages of ms. omitted_

*       *       *       *       *

then for some distance we walked on in silence.

the sun was setting behind the high peaked hills with a glorious
speaking silence. i had never seen such purple clouds—such red and
pink and gold embodied in a sky. they cast their reflection on the
spot we walked on and dyed vestasian's garments and my own. it was the
stilly point of eve, and none but ourselves walked toward the great
gates that bound the city. and suddenly he stopped, and turning,
looked at me.

"the sun is setting. nature's wearying repetition never wearies. would
by the godhead that encircles us that i were never weary too. i have
lived the long hard life that fills eternity, and to me there comes a
never-ending circle of unavailing pain. i have stood it time on time
and never wearied, and because i have not murmured they have imagined
i bore well with it and cared not, felt not. what! can anyone have the
life nerves torn from him and have no pain nor feeling in the process?
i have loved to that strong ecstasy to which only spirits come—and
that love has filled my being. and then when life should be begun and
our true nuptials celebrated, gradually the unseen shadow has crept
in and dragged the vital strength away—inch by inch. for what am i
without this lovely spirit that twines and intermingles with my own?
what am i, or what shall be? without her i am nothing—inanimate laws
and intellect and beauty intermingled without the quickening grace to
make a perfect whole. i cannot bear to see her die. it sickens me even
to the death to let her go. while she is there my whole heart lives in
her; when gone its throbs beat on a hardened bark that has no softness
such as it had when she was there to charm away the pain. at times it
comes to me to offer the great sacrifice—to give up all and let her go
for ever—to transform myself to nature's laws and passing beauty—even
to be part of such sunsets as you see o'er there against the hills.
then comes the whole absorbing passion. i cannot let her go—i will
not—and the ensuing weakness. for as the dark hour deepens she must
pass torn from my side as never flesh and blood were torn from mortal.
they never know the depth of half my love, and think because i only
realise the half i only feel it. ah! genius, you will recognise my
weakness—born from a jest which has enveloped me."

in silence he led me on towards the gate.

there outside, on the wild, glorious moorland, sat a figure robed in
white.

seeing us she rose and came toward us.

this was the shadowy, heavenly beauty i had dreamt of. a face more
perfect i had never seen, nor eyes more sweet and star-like, nor lips
more sweetly parted in that tender smile, half mirth, half pathos.
round her slight waist a belt of shimmering jewels shone, and one great
jewel at her breast. the straying pink of roses played upon her cheek
and faded into white, shaded by eyes so deeply and so softly blue that
one forgot their colour in their depths and longed to live in them. her
smooth brow was shaded by soft hair, each in itself a tendril of pure
gold having the red glint out of it; but faintly here and there, to
make a perfect colouring.

i could no longer doubt her.

on my knees i took her hands within my own and kissed them, and tears
fell from my eyes, the first in all my life.

but then she drew me up to her and kissed me, even as a mother kisses
some lost, erring child, and held me in her arms, and laughed with
tears in her own eyes, and looked at me with such a long, last look
that ever afterwards i marvelled not at this great grief.

and then she turned to him and took his hand in hers and drew him to
me. he took both my hands within his own and looked into my eyes as she
had done, and kissed my lips and turned away.

and then together, she pressed close to him, and his all-seeming
powerful arm clasped round her, they sailed away together into space.

and i stood still without the gate and watched them.

in the distance they looked like one bright, glorious spirit, moving,
brilliantly white. but as they neared the earth, which they must pass,
the whiteness turned to brilliant red.

he gave one glance across towards the planet, scarce lasting out the
instant, but she raised her head and looked above his shoulder eagerly,
to catch the passing sight. and her fair, fragile face shone there,
looking wistfully, till they had neared the gates of hell.

and then i turned and remembered they had passed in silence. i had
never heard her speak.

and the sun set.

the end

colston and coy. ltd., printers, edinburgh

jewel sowers

_greening & co.'s_

popular novels

=when it was dark.= _3rd edition._

by guy thorne. =6s.=

=the oven.=

by guy thorne. =3s. 6d.=

=the serf.= _3rd edition._

by c. ranger-gull. =6s.=

=his grace's grace.=

by c ranger-gull. =6s.=

=mr. topham=: comedian.

by c. ranger-gull. =3s. 6d.=

=back to lilac-land.= _2nd edition._

by c. ranger-gull. =6s.=

=the hypocrite.= _8th edition._

by c. ranger-gull. =6s.=

=miss malevolent.= _2nd edition._

by c. ranger-gull. =3s. 6d.=

=the steeple.=

by reginald turner. =6s.=

=the comedy of progress.=

by reginald turner. =6s.=

=cynthia's damages.=

by reginald turner. =6s.=

=the danger of innocence.= _2nd edition._

by cosmo hamilton. =6s.=

=the love thirst of elaine.=

by s. j. adair fitz-gerald. =6s.=

=fame the fiddler.=

by s. j. adair fitz-gerald. =2s. 6d.=

=mrs. evelyn's husbands.=

by the comtesse de bremont. =6s.=

=daughters of pleasure.=

by the comtesse de bremont. =6s.=

=mr. incoul's misadventure.=

by edgar saltus. =3s. 6d.=

=mary of magdala.=

by edgar saltus. =3s. 6d.=

=the day of prosperity.=

by paul devinne. =6s.=

=a dead woman's wish.=

by emile zola. =3s. 6d.=

=two in one.=

by t. w. speight. =3s. 6d.=

=mora=: one woman's story.

by t. w. speight. =6s.=

=compromised.=

by gertrude warden. =6s.=

=a tragic contract.=

by mount houmas. =6s.=

jewel sowers
a novel

london
greening & co., ltd.
20, cecil court, charing cross road, w.c.
1903



contents

chap.                                                    page
i. an introduction to lucifram                           9

ii. friend and executor                                  13

iii. rosalie                                              21

iv. the golden serpent                                   28

v. the master                                           42

vi. new experiences                                      52

vii. a debt of gratitude                                  57

viii. a book of inspiration                                64

ix. mariana                                              77

x. a conversation in shadows                            85

xi. garden and house of shadows                          92

xii. an act of disobedience                              101

xiii. the folly of simplicity                             119

xiv. broken spirits                                      131

xv. a wayside house and gloomy cell                     139

xvi. the governor                                        154

xvii. a plantation                                        166

xviii. seeds growing contrariwise                          174

xix. a humble crucifixion                                190

xx. a simple conversation                               202

xxi. a man who stood on his head, according to lucifram  209

xxii. a lease of life                                     216

xxiii. the scandal of the temple                           222

xxiv. at the sebberens'                                   232

xxv. the golden priest                                   245

xxvi. conversation and a little pig-stuff                 254

xxvii. after-dinner speeches                               264

xxviii. revenge is sweet                                    277

xxix. a confession                                        286

xxx. festival                                            293

xxxi. mysteries in marble house                           303

xxxii. diplomacy                                           313

xxxiii. the worth of a jewel                                319

xxxiv. "a gift, a friend, a foe, a beau, a journey to go"  326

xxxv. the sun rises on the year                           334

jewel sowers

chapter i
an introduction to lucifram

in the little planet lucifram, that spun a brilliant and solitary course
among the stars, exchanging annual salutations with them as the waxing
and waning of the solar laws brought them out of the void and within
hail, the people each and all walked upside down. the trees were upside
down, the houses, the churches with their steeples, the palaces, the
oceans, rivers, lakes, mountains, animals, and fishes, each and all,
reversed our own conception of mundane propriety. cultivate a patience
with the seeming strangeness of this extraordinary planet, even to the
reading of this simple book, and let that virtue lead you nearer to
another sphere, more to your liking.

there were a few, indeed, upon this sphere who did their best to stand
upon their feet. sometimes they succeeded; but others were bowled down
in the struggle and ended by standing once again upon their heads, or
lying crushed, paying the debt they owed to outraged custom.

the circumference of this sphere was something like two thousand miles.
it bulged out towards the north and south, with giant hollows to the
east and west. and because _everything_ that existed was contrary to our
idea of things, all things looked normal.

when nature and architecture combine to alter things, making them
contrariwise, as people call it, what wonder if morality and all ethics
blend with the custom?

to begin with governments and kingships. unlike those upon a two-legged
basis, a king was never chosen for his worth, but for his frailties. he
was chosen to strew the path of his subjects with flowers which all
might pick like little children out at play, and then would quarrel
over.

alas! to be a king in the planet lucifram! that little planet
topsy-turvy. here, though a ruler might have the will of a hercules to
turn a somersalt and land upon his feet, some diviner instinct calling
him to that, the pigmies around him pinned him with millions of tiny
threads, an anchorage whereby to hold his head safe to the ground.
threads worked in gold! held for the wonder of the multitude.

so for the kings. the gods of all the stars looked down on them. they
heard those faint sighs of weakness—those breathings after higher
things—and pitied some, and smiled at others. and though in the
topsy-turvy synagogues and churches the people prayed for them, no
prayers reached heaven except those simple few the kings themselves
breathed in solitude. prayers that must travel very, very far, as all
prayers must, and which needed the giant strength of great simplicity to
bring them to the end of their weary journey.

so for the kings and princes. an arduous task is theirs—bound thus with
chains—god only knows how hard! as each insidious little link might
whisper, telling its own small share in the universal tale.

in our world we always speak of "church and state"—a correct and steady
way of speaking—but in lucifram 'tis always "state and church," and that
is why the palaces and kings claimed our attention first.

the church, composed of temples, synagogues, and priests, jumbled
together in luxurious profusion, was dressed and bedecked so finely that
the god the people worshipped fell almost out of sight. in their chief
temple, in the greatest city, was a three-tailed golden serpent, coiled
around a golden pole above a table decked in red, and set with incense
vessels. dim and mysterious was that holy place, where priests, all
flowing and bedecked in golden garments, came each day to bow before the
snake. its three tails, the gold of them burnished like fire, spread out
like fans on high, against a background of mosaic. below, resting on the
altar, was the great head, lying quite still; the genius of ages worked
in its cruel fangs and awful eyes. eyes never closing, jewel-glinting,
green and fiery, all-surveying, all-watching. those terrible eyes lit up
the gloom, and compelled men to stand upon their heads as it itself was
forced to do. for by the grim and dreadful fascination of those
never-closing eyes, unconsciously the worshippers changed to position
like to it, tails up, heads down, blinded by their religion.

in this temple the people sat in the big gloomy aisles, each on a little
chair with a ledge in front for kneeling, and heard the priest from the
pulpit, and the reader from his desk. awed by the grandeur and the
solemn dimness, they bowed and salaamed before the triune tails, hidden
from the vulgar gaze by a red silk curtain blazoned in gold. and when
the mighty organ rolled and rumbled, and the angel voices of the choir
boys rang through the gold-washed rafters, their senses were stirred by
some far hidden mystery, and their eyes would dim or kindle as they felt
it; only the gleaming eyes within the veil remained unchanged.

now it was customary for the priests who waited on the serpent to fast a
day each month and marry only once. a layman in lucifram might wed
twice. no priests could marry under forty. for laymen, the age was
twenty-five for the first attempt, and forty for the second; that is,
for the few who preferred company in their latter years to peace. but
though the women, by act of parliament, enjoyed the privilege of
marrying twice, just as the men did, there were certain things clearly
beyond them, they being in lucifram, as here, the weaker vessels. on
those great days whereon the priest drew back the silken curtain and
displayed the serpent, all women were debarred from entering the temple.

and so enough for an explanation and a prologue. take my hand, descend,
and tread on lucifram!

chapter ii
friend and executor

in the capital of lucifram there is a great park—a city park—planted
with trees sown centuries since by the restless winds, when all was
peaceful country. to the right stretches the city—work and pleasure,
laughter and tears, and perpetual hurry-scurry. all round the park
sounds and sights of human life, condensed within a curiously small
circle, were in evidence. silent streets, tall and shadowy, lit by
occasional gas lamps, fringed on a brilliant thoroughfare, with
omnibuses, cabs, and people hurrying everywhere. most spacious squares,
with fountains and statues, backed by huge buildings, erected both for
grace and durability, lay on all sides. the mansions on this side of the
park were in many cases of plain exterior. this gave the lie to the
magnificence within. on the right side of the park, facing it and
running along its entire length, was built the famous greensward avenue.

in the centre of the avenue, standing back under the shadow of the high
walls of two palace gardens rising on either side, stood a large square
house built of black marble. it was built in black, and the blinds were
of deep red, the only colour to relieve it. those were not visible till
night came. thirteen imposing-looking steps lead up to an imposing door,
in black polished oak, rarely carved. two narrow windows in the wall
reached down on each side of it. the house consisted of three storeys
and a basement, and to the back were pretty and extensive gardens
protected by high walls.

the owner of this house was a certain camille barringcourt, who had but
lately come there, within the last three years. with the exception of
servants, he lived quite alone—a bachelor in the land of double
marriages.

now the house in which he lived was very appropriately called "marble
house." it had been built by a millionaire quite recently, despite its
old appearance. the reason why it had such an appearance of age was
because it had been erected from a spoiled cathedral in the remotest
corner of lucifram, where instead of worshipping the serpent they
worshipped the toad. it had cost a vast amount of money to cart the
marble and oak right over from east to west, but it was done right
royally, and the house itself, from this point of view at least, was
very interesting. no sooner was the great mansion completed, and royalty
entertained on one single occasion, than the millionaire died. men and
women agreed on this, that his death was at least mysterious. he was
found dead in bed. so far as the doctors could tell he suffered from
nothing, and had come by no foul play. he had died painlessly, in the
big plain bed-chamber containing little else but the desecrated altar of
the toad, with a fac-simile of the serpent rising above it—a shrine
which all good people in lucifram kept in their private rooms. and so he
was buried, and the ladies mourned. he had been generous. and then his
will was read.

all his vast wealth was given to charities; all went to charity except
the house. that was left "to my friend, camille barringcourt, as a
slight token of esteem, and in remembrance of the past." that was all.
no one had ever heard or seen anything of this friend, and no one knew
anything of the past. but lawyers, like detectives, have a way of
hunting people up. in a little time it was spread abroad that camille
barringcourt lived in fairysky, or at least was staying there, a country
which much resembled italy on the earth.

it may also be mentioned here that camille barringcourt and the lawyer
were left executors of those vast charities.

the first thing about the new-comer's arrival that excited general
interest was the advent of six horses. all were black as night, with
long tails, fiery eyes, shining coats, and tossing, untamed heads.

nearly all the little boys in that aristocratic neighbourhood were late
for school that morning; or better, never went. accustomed as they were
to beautiful horses, they had never even in their experience seen
anything to equal these. the six black horses travelled through the
crowded thoroughfares singly led, each by a groom. their trappings were
of a deep red, and no unnecessary weight was placed upon them. the men
who led the animals were men who understood their business, and had
great patience with their coquettish, curvetting ways. just as the
journey was drawing to a close the traffic in the streets was for the
minute stopped. five of the six horses had passed the crossing, and the
last was drawn up close to lady flamington's carriage. whether it was
her ladyship's hat (she was one of the best dressed and most beautiful
women of the day), or whether her two thoroughbreds were ready to enter
into the fun of the thing, and dance a lively impromptu pirouette with
the new arrival, it would be hard to say. however, the black steed began
a dance, anything but safe in the state of the crowded thoroughfare, and
the bays in harness did their best to follow suit. it was a spirited
attempt; then the groom for once lost his temper.

"get up, you devil!" said he. the horse took him literally and reared
up, despite his efforts to keep it down, dragging him with it, in its
wild, untamable fury. the trampling forepaws struck on the cushions of
my lady's brougham. what might have been the result it is impossible to
say, for her escape on the other side was cut off by a huge lorry drawn
up against her like a wall, but just at that moment a voice fell on the
hubbub and the consternation, and the "voice that breathed o'er eden" on
the day of her marriage had never been so welcome to lady flamington as
that one now. at the same time a hand, the whitest, the most beautiful
she had ever seen (so she told her friends after), grasped at the
bridle.

"waugh-o, starlight—starlight! come, then."

the words, the tone, the caressing hand on one side, the firm hand on
the bridle, were too much for the four-legged beauty. won over by more
words, more pressure on the hateful bit (even though silver), and more
caressing patting on her glossy neck, she came gracefully down to earth
once more.

it seemed to lady flamington that the stranger had sprung up from
nowhere. as a matter of fact, he had sprung from the hansom behind, in
which he was following, at almost walking pace, these six prancing
treasures. then just as the traffic was starting again he looked across
at her.

"you are not hurt," said he. "i should have been bitterly sorry if that
had happened."

for once her ladyship could find no words. she bowed, he raised his hat,
the procession moved along. then she knitted her brows thoughtfully.

"he should have been sorry in either case," she thought, and fell to
studying his face in her memory.

meanwhile the six black horses had turned into greensward avenue, where
likewise at a quicker rate her ladyship's carriage was progressing.

all the way to the spacious private stables at the rear of the private
grounds, mr. barringcourt, for it was he, led that most spoiled of all
spoilt animals, starlight. the little boys followed admiringly, till the
big doors of the stable-yard closed cruelly upon them.

"that looks like a dook turned undertaker," said one.

rumour had spread a report that camille barringcourt was a twice married
gentleman, with a large family.

"how unlike poor geoffrey todbrook," said the ladies, and sighed.

but rumour for once was entirely wrong. one bachelor was dead; another
succeeded him.

the new arrival settled quickly into his new home. seeing it was already
furnished, that was but natural. his servants were all foreigners, dark,
tall, all very unlike the people on this side of lucifram. yet there was
an inexpressible charm, dignity, and quiet repose about them that
delighted and mystified everyone. among them were some women,
parlourmaids, sewing-maids, and housemaids apparently.

each one of these servants, men and women, dressed in black, faced with
deep red. it was a kind of uniform.

now, a few words are needed as to the personal appearance of the master
himself. in figure he was tall, athletic, graceful, broad-shouldered.
his hair was black and short, crisp at the ends, as lady flamington
noticed when he removed his hat. people called his face "odd." it was
dark and swarthy, with a strong forehead, and black eyes which were
gloomy and deeply set. the nose was straight, bearing in its lines more
sensitive refinement than any other feature of his face.

when he smiled he showed, though not obtrusively, a sparkle of white and
even teeth. when lady flamington admired the beauty of his hands she was
within the right. for strength and suppleness they would be hard to
beat, and for whiteness also. this then, in short, was the figure of
camille barringcourt, come to dispense the charity of his friend of the
past; come to settle in marble house, of greensward avenue.

lady flamington, some dozen houses off, persuaded her first and only
husband to call there, soon after the arrival. he did so, hoping to see
the fine black horses she had spoken of. horseflesh was his hobby. he
saw the gentleman, but nothing else in the way of interest, took a
sudden fancy to him, and invited him over to dinner on friday night. the
invitation was as suddenly accepted. sir james went home with some
misgivings. he didn't know whether his wife liked swarthy men; she was
fastidious. his wife had no objection to them. she was delighted to
welcome any of his friends, except turf acquaintances and bookmakers.

on friday night mr. barringcourt came. it was a little formal affair,
one or two of the family circle and an intimate friend. the stranger sat
beside his hostess for dinner, and they talked commonplaces. at last she
turned to him with a pretty grace.

"you have not yet demanded my thanks," said she.

"for what?" he asked.

"you know for what."

"your thanks would necessitate my apologies."

"i am surprised you never offered them."

"it was unnecessary."

"there i must confess to some curiosity. do you remember you said to me,
‘you are not hurt.'"

"well?" said he, and smiled—a smile all the more charming as he bent his
head to hers.

"well!" she retorted. "i was hurt; your horse frightened me. to be
frightened is to be hurt. can you dispute it?"

"i never saw anyone stand pain better. your face was a vision of—of—"

"of what?" she asked.

"i do not understand your language very well, as yet. i shall improve in
it; you must be patient. in a week or two i shall have found the word i
need."

"and till then?"

"learn to be gracious to a poor speaker."

"ah! but i do not intend to let you off so easily. after telling me i
was not hurt, you next proceeded to say, ‘in that case you would have
been deeply sorry'—you see my memory is good. now, am i to understand
that under the circumstances you felt no sorrow?"

"most certainly."

"now we shall quarrel, unless you can explain yourself."

"is it necessary?"

"you shall discover how much so if you do not explain your meaning
instantly."

"then do not blame me if i sink still deeper into the mire. under the
circumstances, i was not sorry. i had been told on coming to this
country i should find all the women forward—most of them ugly—the
remainder plain. after three days' looking round me i had come to the
same conclusion. suddenly by the merest chance my eyes lighted on you.
can you wonder i should feel no sorrow?"

she frowned, then laughed, and looked at him.

"where did you learn this grossest form of flattery?"

"i see your ladyship has no education to appreciate the truth."

"talk to my husband about horses. i have no more to say to you."

"is he a lover of horses?"

"yes. he attends every race meet in the county."

mr. barringcourt smiled. "that speaks for itself," he said.

chapter iii
rosalie

let us pay a call on cinderella.

alas! not a cinderella with a prince and gorgeous clothing, but one
without a tongue, or rather, tongue-tied.

rosalie paleaf, for that was her name, lived alone with an aunt and
uncle. both her parents were dead. she was pretty, of that fair delicate
type called "picturesque." her hair was of a palish yellow tint, glossy,
but straight; her skin was fair and delicate. the eyes were grey, with
dark curling lashes, and delicately marked brows. her nose turned up
just the least little bit, the most charming upward, delicate little
curve in the wrong direction it would be possible to meet. the corners
of her mouth, however, turned down with the saddest, most wistful droop
imaginable. in fact, there was only one feature in her face that kept it
from becoming most woefully pathetic, and that was the little,
inquisitive, life-enjoying nose. to come back to her eyes for finishing
touches. their greyness was very pale. the pupils generally were large,
with an equally black rim along the edge of the iris. inside this rim
the colour gradually paled to the pupil, which gave her eyes a curiously
bright appearance. and then being tongue-tied! she had nothing she could
talk with but her eyes, and so she used them.

uncle and aunt were very kind to her. who indeed could help being that?
she was the gentlest, kindest creature, harmless and very helpless, with
the sweetest face, the happiest manner, and sunniest smile upon
occasions.

they were people of moderate circumstances in a very quiet way, and if
rosalie had not the hardest work of the house to do, it was because her
aunt always insisted on doing it, with the help of an occasional
charwoman. and so, when very young, she learnt to hem, and dust, and do
the toasting. later she got promoted to wiping tea-things, then dinner
dishes, and ended as a fully-fledged young housekeeper, ready to bake
and cook, darn, and make and mend, to sweep and dust, and do all work
that is useful.

beyond this her education had not progressed. she could read and write,
'tis certain, but very little more. accomplishments were beyond the
means of her relations, and had they not been it would never have struck
them a child apparently quite dumb should need such things. so she
stayed at home and was happy, except in the company of strangers, when
her sad defect made itself felt under their pitying glances of surprise,
however well they might try to conceal them.

but a child's happiness often constitutes a woman's misery. as the years
passed by rosalie began to feel her loneliness, her utter incapacity for
the work of the world. she felt also something deeper, stronger, more
unwordable. it was more real than anything else in her life, yet,
because unseen, it was unsympathised with as having no existence. and
so, although her happiness was gradually becoming overshadowed, she
never fully recognised it till one october evening when she had turned
twenty.

to look at rosalie the spectator would never have taken her for that
age. all her life had been spent in one long silent dream—the privilege
of childhood.

it was the kind of autumn evening made for thought and sadness. the sky
was very clear, with a suspicion of purple in it, and the gold of ages
was in the west. as she stood by her bedroom window looking out at it,
there came that terrible foreboding of sadness and sorrow that seems to
do its best to crush young hearts, though perhaps it only moulds them.

and along with it came a longing for expansion, a weariness of the
endless routine, the companionless silence and that nameless thirst
after something, she knew not what. how could rosalie, walking in the
mist, having no speech or utterance, explain it even to herself? she
wanted something, the purple of the sky suggested something—suggested,
nothing more. and from that day forward the nameless longing grew,
settling itself within her heart, finding no happier outside quarters. i
do not know that she looked thinner or more frail, her physical strength
was too great for that. no one beyond herself knew of the longing, and
she attributed it all to discontent, and tried to stifle it.

at last one evening she understood. the inordinate longing for speech
rushed over her.

but how to manage it? it is all very well to find out what you want to
do—but how to do it? there was only one way—only one way, at any rate,
that suggested itself to her, and that way was prayer.

now, her religious education had not been exactly neglected, but rosalie
was one of those heedless creatures who hear a little and invent a great
deal.

she had been told with great piety by her aunt of the great golden
serpent, its wonderful power, its relentless cruelty to those who
crossed or vexed it, its generosity to those who did as they were told,
and from those few rudimentary remarks she had built up a little golden
temple of her own, quite an unseen spiritual affair, in which to worship
the supreme being of lucifram. she certainly gave to the gorgeous
serpent many qualifications she had never been told it possessed, but
what of that? she was but a poor, helpless creature at best. but with a
reverent, far-away love she had always worshipped the serpent, although
as a sex she had been given to understand he reckoned her somewhat
inferior.

but now, sitting up in bed, there came to her one of those terrible
convictions, never to be misplaced, that are in themselves the sheerest
madness or the sheerest sanity, that she must get her tongue untied. and
the serpent, being the strongest of all powers on lucifram, was the
likeliest to do it.

next afternoon at five o'clock saw rosalie kneeling in the famous
temple, her head buried in her hands, praying in the silence as only
sincerity and helplessness can pray.

"oh, serpent, give me my tongue! let me talk," said she, a most natural
request when coming from a woman.

then she went home quite comforted, as only the simple can be.

"one does not pray for nothing," she thought "i feel the serpent heard
me."

and that night she was so happy, she did not notice her uncle's troubled
look and silent way. she did not mean to be selfish, she was thinking
purely of her prayer.

some weeks went by, and every day she walked to the temple and prayed:

"oh, serpent, give me my tongue! let me talk."

but no answer came to her prayer, and at last she got tired of kneeling
down among the empty pews. the building was so big that she felt quite
far away, so she picked up her courage and went up the big aisle, right
up through the choir stalls to the steps rising towards the altar,
hidden by the curtains. it was legitimate for any woman to go so far.
she was perfectly within her right. so she went up the steps and knelt
down quietly beside the golden railing.

and there she prayed to the unseen serpent—prayed, and believed it heard
her. then she went home. how near she had been to that unseen power! how
fervently she had prayed! the serpent always answered prayer, always
looked after the helpless.

on going home her ring at the door was answered by a neighbour with a
white face and swollen eyes.

what was the matter?

an hour ago, soon after she went out, her uncle had been brought home
after a stroke. since then he had died, just after the arrival of the
doctor.

rosalie sank back against the lobby wall, her hands by her sides, her
eyes filled with horror.

"your aunt is upstairs in the back bedroom," said the neighbour, who had
told the story as quietly as she could, as gently as its tragedy
allowed.

rosalie pulled herself together and went upstairs, trying the bedroom
door at the back. it opened, and she was thankful. her aunt sat in a
chair, her head buried in the pillow of the one spare bed. rosalie went
to her and touched her shoulder. the elder woman moved slowly, and then
sat up, smoothing her grey hair.

"i've been here long enough," she said dully. "i must go and see to
things. sit here, rosalie. it isn't for you to be about."

her dull grief repelled all sad advances. from the time that rosalie
found her lying there cramped against the bed she showed no further
signs of weakness, no further signs of giving in, till the funeral was
over.

then when the blinds were drawn up once more, and the november light had
flooded the room, she took her foster daughter in her arms and wept as
only a broken-hearted woman growing old can weep.

"we went to school together," she said at last, twisting her wet soiled
handkerchief around her fingers. after that she scarcely mentioned her
husband again.

but now time showed a great difference in the little household, in
addition to its greatest loss. money troubles and worry, of late months
thickening ominously, had helped to bring about the sudden end. there
were no more happy meals at tea-time, no bread to toast, nothing but the
barest, rude necessities of life. for they were poor, so poor that they
scarcely knew how to look the future in the face. both were very
helpless.

the elder woman in a few short months had grown old, shrunken, and thin.
she tried at times to smile bravely, to take interest in life and
neighbours, but life and interest had gone for her in the old playfellow
and life love. and more and more each day since her uncle's death
rosalie felt the want of speech. she could give none of that bright
assistance that was needed. no better than a living shadow she was bound
to go about the house. yet still she went to the temple to pray in
humility and faithfulness.

and then, as the spring came round, she heard vague, disquieting rumours
of the little house being shut up. her aunt was going to live with a
married brother, whose wife had little in common with her, and she
herself, rosalie, was to be sent to a home for the deaf and dumb and
blind, a large charitable institution, greatly enlarged and improved
upon by the munificence of a dead millionaire, one geoffrey todbrook by
name. insufferable thought! to separate her from the only human being
she had learnt to love, shutting them each within a dungeon of
strangers! "o god! o serpent!" what of the prayer of months, to give one
atom in the multitude the powers of speech? prayer of presumption! its
punishment the taking away of everything that makes some lives worth
living, the precious gift of freedom.

and yet rosalie set her lips hard, there was no drooping, and went once
more, with faith supremely high, but heart all wrong and tortured, to
kneel and pray to god within the temple.

chapter iv
the golden serpent

the afternoon was cold and gloomy, and by the time rosalie reached the
temple the little light that ever came there had quite died away. there
were no americans in lucifram, no english tourists either, consequently
the sacred building from morn to eve was silent as the grave except for
matins and for evensong. but evensong was held at seven, and now it was
but four.

rosalie's heart was in that terrible state of aching which approaches
physical pain. speechless, she knew herself quite helpless.

for lack of speech she must be separated from one who had suddenly grown
more helpless than herself, one whom she could not bear to part with,
one who had grown accustomed to her great defect, and had never labelled
on the door those words: "home for the blind—the deaf—the
dumb—incurables."

"once i get inside there i am dumb for ever," she cried to herself, as
she stumbled up the darkening aisle. "oh, i cannot go—i cannot! i want
to live like other people. to be free—free—free!"

and so she knelt down beside the altar railings, and buried her face in
her hands against its golden bars.

"oh, serpent, let me speak! give me a tongue like other people have. i
cannot go to that asylum—i cannot really. i cannot live without my aunt.
we are all in all to each other. what good am i if i remain a speechless
log? i might as well be dead."

no answer. darkness and silence. that was all. the impenetrable hardness
of it sank to rosalie's heart. suddenly she got up and looked round
cautiously, with pale face and dark-rimmed eyes. there was no noise.
nothing moved in the empty building save herself. silent and trembling,
she took a step forward inside the railing, then another, and her hand
touched the crimson curtain. again she looked around, assured herself
again that she was quite alone, silently drew back the heavy fold and
stepped within. the lights upon the altar, burning by day and night,
changed the dull gloom to brightness. her wandering, awe-struck gaze
fell full upon the serpent, its head and jewelled eyes all shining
underneath the slowly swinging lights.

here, then, was the hidden god that all things worshipped. this was the
god who punished some, rewarded others, and wore the creeds of ages on
its three-pronged tail. her eyes were dazzled by the brilliancy, but the
serpent's wisdom gleaming from those curious eyes attracted her.

"give me what i want! give me what i want!" she whispered, and stretched
out her white arms till her hands had clasped behind the serpent's head.
then she leant forward and pressed her lips against the cruel, hardened,
lifeless fangs, and whispered yet again:

"give me what i want—just so that i may serve you!"

as silently she unclasped her fingers, rising to her feet. she passed
down the three steps leading from the altar, and became aware, with
beating heart and sudden tumultuous fear, that she had been watched.

for, stepping from the side way, came a stranger, stopping her progress
outward to the other side of the veil.

"what is it that you want?" he said.

in his eyes there shone the priceless worth of wisdom's jewels, giving
them in their brilliant expression something of the same impenetrable
light the serpent's had.

rosalie became confused, and mixed the two together. how could she help
it, seeing both had come together? but no words were there for
utterance. she raised her hand to her mouth, her eyes to his face—eyes
that had grown in sadness and in beauty throughout a lifetime—and then
she shook her head.

"dumb?" said he.

she nodded.

"is that what you came to pray about?"

again she nodded. she looked up at him, and her eyes sank. after all, it
was the secret of a life, for none knew of these daily visits to the
temple, and now a stranger had discovered it—the secret which had been
guarded so jealously all these years.

"and you come in here to pray often?"

she shook her head vehemently, and pointed outside.

"i see. you stay outside?"

again she nodded.

then he held the curtain aside, and she passed out, he following her.

the church without was black.

rosalie gave a muttered cry of dismay—the building was so large, its
pews, and steps, and labyrinths all so intricate. but her companion
produced a light that glowed like a thin taper, but burnt with a clearer
and a stronger light, and plainly lit the church around them.

"never trust to the church to give you light," said he whimsically,
"unless, as now, you penetrate to the holy of holies!"

rosalie smiled; she felt it was but polite, unaccustomed as she was to
strangers.

together they walked down the long aisle, and once she stole a glance up
at him sideways, with great curiosity, to see what he was like. but the
stranger was looking at her, and she bent her head downward again. she
evidently did not possess the gift of sweet unconsciousness of self.

"i presume you wished to come away?" he said at the end of their
journey, before he opened the heavy doors.

she nodded.

then he laid his hand upon her shoulder.

"the serpent must be very cruel and hardened if he withstand such a
prayer as that you offered."

there was more amusement than pity in his voice and expression. rosalie
felt, but did not understand it. never had anyone in her narrow life
been able to put so much expression into a mere hand-touch. in gratitude
she could have taken and kissed it many times.

they passed out on to the high steps leading from the temple. the rain
was coming down in torrents. the street lamps glistened through it, and
the passers-by were infrequent.

"how are you going home?" he said. the outside world seemed to have
separated them.

she pointed to her feet.

"walking? well, hurry and don't get wet. it would be a pity to spoil the
prayer by leaving no time for its fulfilment. good-night!"

then he moved away a step or two, and she stopped to put up her
umbrella. suddenly, however, he turned round, and came with quick
strides toward her.

"see, here is my card. when you have made headway with the serpent, and
received an answer to your prayer, come and see me!"

and he scribbled on the back of the card "admit bearer," and then handed
it to her, once more leaving her standing on the steps.

then rosalie, having succeeded in getting up the umbrella, and gathering
up her skirts, turned in the direction of home. it was a walk of about
twenty minutes, and all the way she thought of the stranger, of his
interesting face, deep eyes and mellow voice, his hand laid so kindly on
her shoulder. she remembered, also, that sudden perceptible change when
outside the church, a mixture of harshness and coldness and pride, more
shown in his manner than his words.

"i wonder what he was doing inside the curtain?" she thought. "perhaps
he had gone there to pray like me. i hope i did not disturb him." then
she sighed. "he looked a rich man, and he could say whatever he wanted
to. there could be nothing he was wanting half so much as i."

on reaching home she was met by her aunt. as soon as they were seated at
the frugal tea, the lady explained that a mr. ellershaw, an acquaintance
of her dead husband, had called that afternoon to see her. on hearing
how matters stood, and the separation that was imminent, he had told her
of a post of caretaker he knew to be vacant, where the work was to look
after a large building in the city let out in flats to different
business men. there would be a certain amount of work to do in
connection with this—and he did not know whether either of them would
care for such a post; but it was there if they wished. it would ensure
them living together, four rooms in the topmost storey. rosalie looked
across her tea-cup and nodded her head eagerly.

"you like such a prospect?" her aunt asked quietly.

she nodded again.

"it will be very hard work, and i am not as strong as i used to be."

rosalie held out her hands and looked at them triumphantly. then she
pointed to herself, and smiled.

"you think you could undertake some of it?"

so together they wrote a letter accepting the post, and a week later
left their old home, with all its memories and associations, to settle
in a fifth storey dwelling amongst the skylights.

rosalie felt her prayer in part was answered. they were not to be
separated after all. hard as the work might be, it meant freedom and the
company she loved. she was content, went to the temple, knelt humbly and
returned thanks. then she went on praying for a voice with a faith born
of simplicity and her own idea of god.

one day a priest found her praying there. he inquired the cause. like
the stranger, he was not long in finding it. he put his hand upon her
head, and blessed her in the name of the serpent's three tails. then he
went back to the priests' lodgings, and kept his story for supper. he
was a jolly man, of the earth earthy, and his idea of the serpent was
that his golden coils were lucrative. the priest was not bad-hearted; he
was simply mediocre. but he had a sense of humour—and who, indeed, but
the soured and stupid have not?—and the idea of a girl kneeling by the
altar railings (he had never seen her, as on that one unique occasion,
step beyond) praying persistently to be allowed to talk when plainly she
was physically beyond it tickled his sense of funniness. he laughed and
shook till the tears ran down his face.

"and she believes it—_that's_ the biggest joke," he cried. "believes
that if she prays long enough the serpent will weary or turn merciful,
and fulfil her prayer."

"according to our history of the past, with its wonders and miracles,
that is not so impossible as it seems," said one, more thoughtfully.

"she'd best jump back a hundred year or two, and cap one miracle by
another, then," remarked a third.

"what did you say to her, james peter?" asked a fourth.

"oh, i blessed her, and prayed to the serpent to look serious, and the
request was granted. 'twas a miracle on a small scale, i can assure you.
i could have roared right out."

"what is she like to look at?" put in a fifth.

"pretty—sad-looking—just the sort of woman to get an idea. that is the
sort we can't afford to quarrel with. they tip so handsomely on
sundays."

"little or tall?"

"oh, tall! medium, at any rate. couldn't smile if she tried. sacred
liver of the serpent! what a sermon for one of you fellows with a love
of sentiment to preach on sunday."

"wait till the woman is made whole, and sitting in the congregation.
then our fortunes are secured," said another drily.

and in this respect the priests of the serpent were very different from
our own. amongst themselves they never acted the hypocrite—the heathen
idolaters!

so next day, when rosalie went to pray, one or two passed in and out
silently to behold the phenomenon. after a time they grew accustomed,
and took no further notice of her. after all, a woman might as well
spend her time in an attitude of humble devotion. experience generally
proved those to make the best sort of wives.

rosalie and her aunt had been established a little over six months in
the new home, and the work was so hard and unaccustomed that it was
beginning to tell on both of them.

the older woman was little better than a breakdown before she came, and
gradually without much complaint, but growing silence, she sank into the
bed of weakness more. it was a sickness from which she never rose.

she had been too old to face these sudden changes, was not made of the
stuff that endures, or not enduring, fights. so then this cloud had only
risen in mockery to sink the heavier. where was rosalie's prayer of love
and thanksgiving?

the last week of her aunt's illness was very strange and unreal to
rosalie—strange and unreal when, after the second funeral within a year,
she sat alone in the little empty four-roomed storey.

her hands, roughened, though not coarsened, by hard work, were clasped
between her knees. her head had sunk forward on her breast, her open
eyes saw nothing.

vaguely she hoped that she might be the next to go, thought of her
prayer for speech, and dashed the bitter tears from her dull eyes. what
of her prayer? perhaps to the serpent it sounded nothing more than
clamorous presumption and self-will.

again she had been offered the shelter of the home for deaf and dumb by
those who recognised her sad position. was she ungrateful? many poor
waifs there were, she knew, in that great city, with none to help them
to the scantiest food and shelter.

"i can't believe you're either kind or just, and i won't pray to you any
more!" she cried inwardly, jumping up fiercely at last. "i wasn't made
to be without a tongue. i wasn't! i wasn't! you haven't the power to
give me one; that's what it really is."

but no bricks and mortar fell to punish such an outburst.

"what have i done that i should be left here alone?" she continued. "i
want to go along with aunt and uncle. you know i do. i can't live here
alone."

but there was no answer. gradually a calmer spirit came over her,
together with a wish to find out that sphinx-like secret that wrapped
itself in icy silence.

"what's the good of making me want to talk if you won't let me?" she
asked.

out of the vast silence a voice seemed to shape itself at last.

"give up! sacrifice!" it said.

it was such a very beautiful voice, and yet so very cold, that rosalie
shrank from it. sacrifice was such a heathenish thing! besides, what was
there to sacrifice in the way of a tongue—she hadn't got one, not a
serviceable one, at any rate.

"the serpent's will comes first with all believers," cried the same
voice out of the silence.

"i wish we could agree," said rosalie, with no disrespect, and then fell
a-thinking.

yes. after all, it came to the old, old thing. a clashing of wills—one
human, one divine—if such it could be called. and therein lay the only
sacrifice that god or the serpent ever needed. it meant the sacrifice of
will.

slowly and clearly the truth unfolded itself. if her faith were pure and
unselfish, she must be willing to give up longing and praying for that
which was beyond her, and still love and serve the serpent even without
reward.

and to what path did her duty point? the thankful acceptance of a
shelter that was offered, a gentle surrender without bitterness into
god's hands. an ending of a prayer he thought fit not to answer.

it meant a great deal to rosalie. the priest had laughed at her
simpleness in expecting the performance of a miracle. perhaps would all
else had they heard it; but to her it was a very real thing, the outcome
of real belief, that left a shattered feeling of disappointment when the
ending came.

"i thought the serpent always answered prayer when it was real," she
said, and felt suddenly like one moving uncertainly in unknown lands
amongst a host of strangers.

the time was drawing round to autumn again, and now that her aunt had
been removed, arrangements were being made for her going. within the
week, she had been told, she would go the home. those who had interested
themselves on her behalf did not like to think of the lonely girl. the
doctor who had attended the aunt and uncle had very kindly made it his
business to remove all delays, such as often took place for those who
were admitted.

another woman, older and stronger, and more accustomed to the work, was
engaged. she had been there for some time before her aunt's death.
rosalie, in this new and quiet mood, recognised the kindness that had
been shown to her on all sides. but though she was truly thankful, she
could raise no enthusiasm. the next day, when afternoon came, she
dressed herself as carefully as her worn clothes would allow, and went
once more towards the temple.

but with what different feelings! for two years past she had gone always
with the same earnest prayer, with no doubt of its acceptance, and now
she was going to give up the prayer and everything that made her life
worth living.

it was just such another wet, dull day as that a year ago when, with
excess of feeling, she had drawn aside the sacred curtain and stept
within the holy place.

to-day, as usual, she went and knelt beside the railings. all was
growing dark. the same silence, the same utter emptiness, pervaded the
temple now, as then. now, as then, the great longing seized her to pass
within the veil. so silently she rose, drew back the curtain stealthily,
and stept within. the serpent's steadfast gaze demanded her first
glance. then she looked round, but perceived no stranger. assured, she
ascended the steps and knelt beside the gorgeous table. with tenderness
and love, the outcome of simplicity and pure devotion, she clasped her
hands once more about the serpent's head, kneeling before it.

"i'm sorry," she whispered, her lips close to the terrible mouth. "i
made a god of my own tongue instead of you. but now i understand. and,
oh! serpent, teach me the right way to live, and keep me from growing
bitter."

then, as before, she imprinted a light kiss, tender and loving, on the
unkissable mouth, and silently bowed her head some minutes on the table.

then on a sudden rosalie rose, her eyes wide open, and stared at the
golden god. they stared in wonderment, but growing understanding. the
light of dawning wisdom was in her eyes.

one minute, two minutes, three, passed away. she turned round suddenly,
emerged into the church, dark now as once before about a year ago. a
light was in her hand; she cared not how she came by it, but partly
knew.

a priest from one of the choir stalls was watching her, with a feeble
candle in his hand.

he called out "treason! blasphemy!" to see a woman thus emerge from
behind the sacred curtain. it was james peter.

rushing forward, he slipped over a footstool, and fell down heavily. his
light was extinguished. down the vast aisle, with the lightness of a
spirit, rosalie ran. her eyes were laughing, a flush was on her once
pale cheek.

james peter, rising, followed her. he puffed and groaned at every
priestly step.

but when the door was open she turned and nodded to him in the distance.
the door closed. he was in darkness. he had followed solely upon her
light.

not till the lights were brought for evensong did he extricate himself
from the toils of the massive building. then he told his tale.

"i tell you she turned round at the door and called to me ‘bon soir,
monsieur! adieu!'" he cried for the third time to his companions.

"good lord! what does it mean?" said one.

"was she not dumb?" asked a second.

"as dumb as the serpent!" replied james peter. "she went into the holy
place, and is cured."

"a woman in the holy place!"

"yes! i called ‘blasphemy!' but the damned footstool tripped me! had it
not been for that i had caught her and brought her up before the great
high priest."

"a footstool tripped you!"

"don't speak so sneeringly, brother thomas john. i said a footstool
tripped me."

"and you lost the woman?"

"what could i do without a light?"

"strike matches."

"i followed her eyes till the door closed, and forgot about them.
besides, not being a smoker, i never carry any."

"did you say you found a woman in the holiest place?" asked others,
crowding round.

"i did not find her there, i saw her coming out."

"coming out! and never stopped her?"

"no!"

"but we must find her. what is her address?"

"i don't know. what's the punishment when we have found her?"

"in olden times it was to have her tongue torn out by the roots."

"but the serpent had just given her one, i tell you."

"nowadays, i expect, the punishment will be modified. strict silence on
penalty of death, maybe."

"but if the serpent has given her a tongue, who then dare take it away?"

"how has the serpent given her one?"

"i tell you, before she was dumb."

"impossible! no woman was ever so afflicted—worse luck!"

"i tell you she was dumb, and is cured. she said to me at the door, ‘bon
soir, monsieur. adieu!' very pretty words," and he mimicked the tone and
gesture.

"this is sheer madness. there is no sense in the words!" cried another.

"is it necessary for women to speak sense?" asked james peter.

all the others laughed. he looked dangerous. and so they talked, and all
gesticulated. but the mistake was on the part of james peter—in part, at
least.

he never heard the lady speak. it was his own imagination which coined
strange words without meaning.

chapter v
the master

rosalie outside the temple never paused, apparently, to think. she did
not take the direction of her old home, but flew on as if scarcely
touching the ground towards that portion of the city where lay the
mansions and the ancient park. the usually crowded streets were almost
deserted, the rain kept wayfarers within doors. nothing hindered her
rapid movements onward.

greensward avenue was one long vista of shining pavements, dripping
trees, and glistening street lamps. here and there brighter lights shone
from the entrances to houses. but on rosalie sped till she came to the
central house, which stood a little back behind high iron palings.

the door had two leaves, and opened inward from the centre. there was a
vestibule beyond, and then another double door of thickest glass,
polished and cut to shine like diamonds. above the hall door a deep red
lamp was burning, which cast its light well out into the street. the
only furniture within the vestibule was a broad chair of oak, and a
massive umbrella stand all carved with hideous faces, very ancient, no
doubt, but not exactly beautiful.

rosalie noticed these as she stood on the top step touching the bell,
and because each face was very fascinating she would have continued
looking at them had not the inner door opened upon the instant.

it was not a creaking door. it opened noiselessly and swiftly, and in
the doorway stood a man.

he had none of the superabundant dignity generally associated with the
servants in rich houses. his hair was not powdered, his dress was plain,
and black.

rosalie, so swift and impetuous until now, came to a standstill. she
looked at him, and he at her. she had no voice with which to explain her
errand, and suddenly remembered her only chance of admittance there was
the card. for it was to marble house she had come, the house of the man
whom she had met in the temple just a year ago.

"what is it that you want?" he asked. these were the exact words with
which she had been greeted by the master.

then she remembered the card was hidden away in the bosom of her dress
in a little silken bag she had made in an idle moment for it months ago.
she must produce it, that was evident, and trust to providence to do the
rest. she turned round towards the many-headed umbrella stand, and began
to extricate the card of introduction. the man stood there waiting, and
when she turned round, flushed and flurried, holding the card, and
glancing at him suspiciously to trace the smile upon his lips, she found
nothing there, not even surprise. he evidently was old enough to be
beyond it

rosalie pointed to the back; he read it, then motioning her to sit in
the chair facing the hydra-headed umbrella stand, went in once more
behind the polished doors and closed them after him.

the door opened silently again before long.

"come this way," said the low, serious voice.

the doors swung to behind them. they entered upon a large square hall.
it was not brilliantly lighted, and the farther end was dim and scarcely
discernible. but every thing was rich and massive, and highly polished.
it reminded her in some indescribable way of the temple she had just
left. carved oak chairs, just as those seen in the sacred building,
lined the walls, standing round in a perfect square, except where
interrupted by some other article of furniture. these chairs seemed to
be endless.

as rosalie passed along she became accustomed to the dimness, and
noticed from this farther end a spiral staircase ascending to the upper
floor. it was built in polished oak, and went round and round in a way
that reminded her of the serpent's coils. it led to a gallery that
overlooked the hall on all sides.

three double glass doors of the same peculiar lustre as the entrance
(which made the fourth) led out of this hall, one on each side, one
being beyond the staircase.

her companion passed through that door to the left, and she followed
him. they came upon a corridor, and stopped before the last door on the
left-hand side. her guide knocked, then opened it. there was no name to
give; rosalie had no tongue to speak, no card to show. then the door
closed again, and she found herself in the presence of the man whom she
had come to seek.

he was sitting by a table reading. a fire was burning in the hearth near
by. a high shaded lamp stood on the ground beside him. the floor was
thickly carpeted, the walls were lined with books from floor to ceiling,
one other door led from the room.

the master looked up as she entered, then got up, pushing the book away.

"so you have come," he said. he came forward and held out his hand.

rosalie, trembling and uncertain, returned the hand-shake, nodding.

"what! you cannot speak yet?"

she shook her head, but as he was withdrawing his hand she clutched it
eagerly, unconscious of anything but this one little sinking straw of
hope.

this time he looked at her more closely. "what is it?" he asked.

she raised her other hand to her throat and mouth, then pointed to him,
her eyes full on his face.

"i'm not the serpent," he answered, and he shook his head and tried to
disengage his hand.

but rosalie's fingers tightened with a fierceness and determination
altogether foreign to her. her cheeks flushed, her eyes flashed angrily;
she gave one little imperious stamp with her foot.

the master looked at her and smiled—a smile that travelled from his eyes
to the corners of his mouth.

"i see. you do not intend to go till i have performed an—an
impossibility?"

rosalie nodded in all seriousness.

"it is the gift of speech you're wanting?"

she nodded.

"it's very dangerous; leads people into all kinds of indiscretions."

she shook her head vehemently.

"you think you differ from the commonality?"

but rosalie neither shook her head nor nodded. she only looked up at him
with no other expression in her eyes except dumb entreaty.

"come to the light," said he, "and try to look less ghostly. after all,
if you can't be cured you can't. you're brave enough to stand that,
aren't you?"

again she nodded, still looking at him.

he pushed the shade of the lamp up. "now open your mouth," he said.

obediently rosalie did as she was told.

"why, you've got a tongue!" said he, bending his brows, and stooping
down to her. "can't you move it?"

but rosalie could not. it was complete paralysis of the muscles
evidently.

"come with me, and i'll see what i can do."

he led her through the other door into another room. the walls of this
place were lined with chests and cupboards with glass fronts, containing
curious instruments. in the centre was a long table. the room was also
fitted up with chairs such as dentists use, and a marble washing basin
fitted with water pipes, hot and cold.

yet when the light was turned on the general effect was cheerful.
rosalie found it so, at any rate, for renewed hope was springing in her
heart. she sat down upon the chair he drew for her, and watched him
whilst he went to the cupboard and brought out something shaped like a
very long darning needle. it was thick at one end, very fine and pointed
at the other. then from another shelf containing flasks of glass
polished and cut he took a liquid shining like silver, and poured some
into a tiny crucible. with these he came back to her and placed them on
the table. then he looked at her, smiling.

"this will hurt you very much," he said; "but you asked for it, so you
will have to go through with it."

anyone but rosalie would have noticed that the expression of his face
was not particularly kind. but she noticed nothing. she leant back
against the head-rest; he placed his hand upon her eyes. after that they
were too heavy for her to open them. she opened her mouth instead.

it was a curious kind of pain, if pain it could be called. never in the
whole of her life had she ever felt anything so soothing. she could not
tell how long the sensation lasted, but it ceased very suddenly. then
although her eyes were closed she felt (this was the curious part of it)
a strong light shining into her mouth, right back to the roots of that
so far silent tongue. it was a light that had the power to heal and
strengthen, and for a long, long time it played upon every unused nerve
and delicate muscle. at last all was over; the master laid his hand upon
her eyes again and opened them.

"now," said he, "the miracle has been performed. are you satisfied?"

from long custom rosalie nodded.

"you must speak," he answered, laughing, "if but to show your
appreciation of the gift."

"thank you," she said, quite perfectly, with just a little break in the
word that took nothing from its sweetness.

"did you find the pain very bad?"

"i nev-er felt it."

"never felt it?" he repeated. "give me your hand."

but her pulse was even, and he frowned.

"where did you come from when you came to me?" he asked, bending his
eyes down to hers with a keen, penetrating glance.

"i came from the temple."

"from the prayer?"

"yes."

"then you—" but here he stopped. "i see," he continued, but in reality
he didn't.

"did you expect i should be hurt?" she asked.

"i can hardly believe you were not."

"but i should have screamed. i made no sound."

"that was scarcely possible. for my own part, i always think it best to
guard against screams, they are so unhelpful and unnecessary."

now rosalie looked at him, with eyes just as keen and penetrating as his
had been.

"why do you stare at me?" he asked, smiling.

"to see if you are disappointed."

here he laughed.

"be careful. your tongue is getting rather out of bounds already."

"i think you would rather have enjoyed my being hurt."

"well, what can you expect in a country where vivisection is disallowed?
one must take what little pleasure one can get."

here he led the way back into the outer room. when they were both
through he turned the key and put it in his pocket.

"i rarely go in there," he said. "few folks are fool enough to come to
me. i have no ambition to become a doctor, and i shun the popularity
that hangs upon the quack."

they were both standing by the table now, one on either side. rosalie's
eyes were fixed dreamily on a large glass ink-stand in the centre of the
table. she was beginning to feel indescribably tired. there was nothing
very wonderful in this, the operation had lasted longer than she was
aware. but though tired, she was feeling remarkably light-hearted,
longing to get outside and give herself two or three decided pinches to
become convinced she was awake, and that this great good fortune of her
prayer had at last come to her.

but over and above the tired feeling and the unreality came gratitude to
her deliverer. the thought of this made her suddenly raise her eyes and
look across at him.

certainly his face was very proud, and the shadows lurking underneath
his eyes and at the corners of his mouth gave it a dark, forbidding
expression. it was not altogether pleasant.

"the feature i like best is his nose," thought rosalie. "the one that
frightens me most is his mouth; the one that most interests me is his
eyes."

"you have been very kind to me," she said. "is there any way in which i
can pay you back?"

but he shook his head.

"i do not think you could give me anything tangible, but perhaps you
yourself will be able to suggest something."

rosalie flushed to the roots of her hair. "i haven't anything," she
answered.

"not even a soul?"

"what is that?"

"that part of you which under certain conditions becomes immortal."

"that part of me belongs to the serpent."

"the serpent passed you on body and soul to me."

"the serpent did nothing of the sort," she answered vehemently, if
slowly. "i—i—i—"

"you what?"

"i nothing."

his eyebrows came together in a frown.

"yes," he answered quietly, "there is one way in which you can pay me
back. speak the truth in answering my questions."

"i'll try," said rosalie meekly.

"then put an ending to that ‘i—i—i—.'"

"i came because i thought it was time. i got a little bit tired of the
serpent."

"why?"

"because it never took any notice of me."

"are you sure?"

rosalie's curious eyes looked up innocently and met his.

"does that surprise you very much?"

"i confess that it does."

"do you know, i'm very tired. if you don't mind, i'll come again
to-morrow and talk it over."

but he shook his head, and smiled again.

"i don't think i'll let you go," he said. "your answers are not very
satisfactory. besides, where is there you can go?"

"oh, with a tongue one can go anywhere and do anything."

"you think so?"

"yes."

and here from sheer weariness and exhaustion she slipped down in the
arm-chair beside her.

it had been a very hard day, and the ending had told upon her strength.
she had not fainted, however, she was only sleeping.

mr. barringcourt crossed the room and looked at her very narrowly, even
dropping on one knee to examine her features more nearly.

it was a very pale, thin, and tired face he looked at, delicate and
fragile, with dark lashes, and faint blue shadows underneath the closed
eyes. the backs of her hands were rough, and he took each up and
examined it as though he had been a fortune-teller—back and front.

then he began walking slowly back and forwards through the room. his
face, though handsome after a kind, was certainly not of the most
prepossessing; and yet in repose his expression was one of weariness and
contempt.

"what shall i do with her?" he muttered. "keep her to prevent blabbing
as usual. keep her and bring her up to talk properly. when she is old
enough, or rather fit enough, i'll let her out on a lease long enough to
take her to the devil. always the same! everlastingly the same! coming
and going, with nothing to give and everything to ask. dull to the very
core, chattering like magpies, smiling and aping god knows what! rich
and poor, all of them alike. and for some reason best known to myself i
stand it. what an excellent patient fisherman i should make!"

then he sat down again very deliberately in his chair, and drew the book
he had been reading towards him, at the same ringing a bell. the same
man who had admitted rosalie answered it.

"take her away, and see she doesn't get out," said he, without looking
up; and the other evidently understood so well that he never asked a
question.

chapter vi
new experiences

when rosalie awoke next morning, it was with a pardonable sense of
bewilderment and estrangement.

instead of the little bedroom, bare of carpet, and devoid of all
furniture, except the poorest and the simplest, she found herself in one
that was really palatial.

the bed had deep hangings of red silk, and she was not up to date enough
to tear them down as breeding microbes and all things unhealthy. then by
degrees, her eyes travelling beyond the bed, she gradually became
acquainted with the other things within the room, washstand,
dressing-table, sofa, chairs; and here rosalie gave a squeal of delight,
and jumped out of bed, for there opposite was a wardrobe, as respectable
as carved black oak could make it. but it was not the wardrobe that
attracted her attention so much as the mirror set full length in its
middle door—a mirror larger than she had ever seen before or dreamt
about. rosalie was not vain, but she had always entertained a great
longing to see her feet at the same time as her head, and had thought it
only a luxury and privilege accorded to the rich. when she had become
accustomed to this novel vision she walked over towards the windows.
here, so far as beauty was concerned, a disappointment waited on her.
all three of them looked upon a high blank wall opposite. it gave a
sense of extreme dulness to the place.

just then her explorations and discoveries were cut short by a knock at
the door, and on it entered a woman carrying a tray holding a cup of
tea. rosalie, who understood nothing of this sort of thing, stared at it
and the bearer.

"i'm quite better now, thank you," she said, shaking her head. "i was a
little tired last night. i'd rather not have my breakfast in bed, if you
don't mind."

"this is not your breakfast," said the other, in a voice so well
modulated that many seemingly more exalted might have envied it.

"oh, what is it?" said rosalie, standing still with her hands behind her
looking at it.

"a cup of tea to help you to dress."

she had the sweetest voice imaginable. rosalie thought it the saddest
she had ever heard.

"i shan't be ten minutes dressing," she replied decidedly.

"quite an hour, i should say," replied the other.

"oh!" gasped rosalie. then she clapped her hands together, caught up the
flowing robe and skipped across the room to the bed.

"if i'm not dressed in ten minutes, my name's not rosalie paleaf."

then with a sudden change to alarm in her manner, she turned round,
growing alternately hot and cold.

"i say, where are my things? i can't see them anywhere."

"i took them away last night. there are your clothes for the day." and
she directed her attention to a chair on which some very pretty and
expensive _lingerie_ was laid.

rosalie looked at it, then drew herself up.

"i want my own clothes," she said. "these are too good for me; the
others might be poor, but they were my own."

"i am afraid you cannot have them; you must dress in these."

the tears rose in rosalie's eyes.

"i want my own clothes," she said again. "auntie and i cut and made them
together. they were the last pair of stockings that she ever knit."

there was no answer.

"won't you bring them back?" said rosalie at last, the tears still
standing in her eyes.

"i am afraid it is against the rules of the house."

then rosalie got up with a sigh, and prepared to get inside the first
garment.

"there is your bath first."

"i never bath in the morning; i always leave that till night."

"i think you had better do that which is customary."

again rosalie sighed, and followed her tormentress to an adjoining
bath-room.

and so it took her well on into the hour before she was dressed, ready
to leave the bedroom.

mariana, who stayed to help her, insisted on arranging her hair, and
after all arranged it much more becomingly than rosalie herself had ever
done.

but the black robe with its red silk facings, that fitted her companion
so becomingly, suited her not at all. the fit was as perfect as it could
be, but otherwise she looked quite out of place in it.

breakfast was served on the same floor as that on which her bedroom
was—three rooms away.

all this portion of the house evidently looked out on to nothing better
than the wall mentioned before; but the beauty of the interior
compensated for outside gloom. rosalie was charmed with everything she
saw, though somewhat awe-struck, and she took her breakfast shyly from
the hands of what she described to herself as the handsomest man she had
ever seen. she also made a mental note that he must be brother to the
man she saw downstairs.

rosalie had not gone all this time without grateful remembrance of that
ordinary gift she had come to possess; but somehow there was some vague,
indescribable thing in her surroundings that took away a full
appreciation. she was longing to be outside, to talk with people more
like herself, not all in black with red silk facings and knee breeches,
and voices modulated to a soft perfection.

rosalie's voice was sweet, but it was not the sweetness found in theirs.
hers was the outcome of expression, theirs of classical harmony. but how
was she to get away? she dare not ask mariana, for she was getting an
uncomfortable idea that mariana, from no ill motive, always thwarted and
opposed her. so, watching her opportunity, she escaped and passed down
the spiral staircase.

in the big hall below all was silent as death. evidently no one was
about.

she ran across to the big doors with a palpitating heart—outside them
was freedom, she scarcely knew from what.

alas! another hand had touched the large glass handle before her own.

"your card, madam. your passport out."

"i have none. i shall not be away five minutes."

"i am afraid you cannot go."

"but i must go."

there was no answer. exasperated, rosalie stood and faced him.

"you let me in, and you can let me out."

"the orders are that you are not to pass."

"whose orders?"

"the master's."

"then take me to him."

"he is engaged at present."

"i'll go myself, then."

chapter vii
a debt of gratitude

as rosalie passed along the corridor her sudden decision was sealed by
growing annoyance and a longing, almost amounting to fear, to get away.

with scarcely a pause she knocked upon the door, that door through which
she entered last night. without stopping she opened it. mr. barringcourt
was there alone, at a table littered with papers, writing. he was indeed
busy and engrossed, for on her entrance he did not raise his head, till
accosted by her voice, and then he looked up sharply enough.

"you!" said he, bringing his eyebrows together in that dark frown which
rosalie had seen last night, and seeing had never forgotten.

"yes. i want to go out."

"impossible!" said he, with an impatient gesture of his hand, and
returned to the paper.

"i want to go out," she repeated. "and you have no right to stop me."

"in my own house i have every right. go away, you are interrupting me."

"so are you interrupting me."

he laughed, not altogether kindly, and looked up at her again.

"that is little short of impudent."

"i don't care. i want to go out, and if you won't give me leave, i shall
take it."

"take it then, by all means."

"that man at the door won't let me."

"knock him down. it will be one way of surmounting the difficulty."

"he is such an elephant. i disliked him the very first time i saw him,"
she replied with energy, and as much simplicity as the truth occasioned.

"well, go away and fight it out with him; watch the door, and bounce out
when he's not looking."

"i won't do anything so undignified. i shall make friends with the
kitchen people, and creep out that way."

"the kitchen door leads into the garden, and the walls are high, and the
gate is locked. i keep the key myself, to ensure no one getting to the
stables."

"then give me leave to go out at the front."

"now, why should you want to go out at the front? you have as beautiful
a home as you could possibly wish for. what more can you want?"

"fresh air and human beings."

"you have them here."

she shook her head. the tears rose in her throat, and were very hard to
choke down again.

"it's the dismallest place i ever came to; and i'm no use. the people
here always contradict me."

"you are the first person who has ever complained of them; and your
opinion goes for nothing, your own conduct leaves so much to be
desired."

"in what way?"

"in my time i have experienced much ingratitude, but never any quite to
equal yours."

"i—ungrateful?"

"most decidedly!"

"what are you wanting from me?"

"quiet submission."

rosalie's eyes opened wide, her lips parted; her expression was one of
unfeigned surprise.

"what's that?"

"to do what you're told quietly. now you _know_, there is no excuse for
your not complying."

"but to submit means to stay here."

"of course!"

"but i can't. oh, i can't really! anything but that."

"nothing but that. you come to me with the most unusual request, and i
am fool enough to put myself out of the way for you. then you expect to
go away, or rather slip away, without any more words about repayment.
and when you are brought back, all this squalling."

"nice people are quite content with ‘thank you.'"

"i'm not nice, and ‘thank you' never appeals to me."

"but if i stay here i can do nothing."

"yes, you can mope."

"in return for a tongue?"

"why not? it would be the height of self-sacrifice, and the perfection
of thanksgiving."

her serious eyes met his thoughtfully. "do you really wish me to stay
here?"

"i not only wish, but am determined on it."

"then my self-sacrifice can never be spontaneous."

"you mean you are changing your mind. you are wishful to stop?"

"not wishful, but if you want it, i'll—i'll try to settle down more
cheerfully. after all, it's only just."

"that is so."

"shall i often see you?"

"never. i am not fond of inflictions."

he spoke so drily, and the words were so unkind, that rosalie's wistful
face grew paler. yet still she argued to herself it would be selfish to
wish to be free, to have a tongue and everything. and after all, the
stranger was so clever that he must of necessity know best.

"will you let me out just for an hour?" she asked at length, with a
voice greatly subdued from the first clamorous outburst.

"not for an hour."

"but i have an aunt, and she is dead. i shouldn't like strangers to take
what once belonged to her."

"where is your uncle?"

"he is dead too."

"your people?"

"i have none."

"where then, in the name of all the devils in lucifram, do you intend to
go to?"

"i thought when people knew i had miraculously come by a tongue they
would—"

"ah! i thought as much. you want to behave with all the absurdity of a
hen that has laid an egg."

"indeed!" said rosalie, flushing.

"you want to get out just to cackle."

she was silent.

"you admit it?"

"i admit nothing but your want of manners."

"what a waspish, vinegarish tongue yours is."

"it's the fault of the doctor, then. if one cannot produce a sweet
instrument one might as well admit oneself a failure."

"how was i to tell? your face was so deceptive."

"maybe so is my tongue. i was only speaking in fun. let me out for one
hour. lend me twopence, and i will return, having spoken to no one, and
in the right frame for being submissive."

for a short time he was silent. at last he said:

"promise me faithfully you will return."

"i promise you most faithfully."

"within the hour?"

"yes."

"you understand perfectly that my reason for bringing you back is not
for any personal gratification i should derive from it. it is simply so
that you may not obtain any great or particular pleasure from having a
prayer perfected."

"you speak plainly enough for the dullest mind."

"i'm glad. now you may go. and remember, come back if you have any sense
of gratitude."

so rosalie passed out again into the farther hall.

"i have permission to pass," said she at the door, and then she stood
outside.

it seemed to her when she reached the parapet that she had been out of
the world for years. and oh! to be back in the world again! to see and
hear the sights and sounds, so commonplace and ordinary, yet to her
stilled ear so sweet again. never had that terrible silent mansion
struck her as so terrible till now she stood amongst the noise of work
and life once more.

one hour of freedom. one hour with the light, jogging world, and then to
pass once more beneath the shadow—a silent spirit in a silent world. the
'bus rattled on, taking its own slow time towards that quarter of the
city where she had lived. she found the upper storey empty, and none had
missed her. yesterday the doctor had told her his intention of coming
for her at four o'clock to-day. it was not yet quite twelve.

each of the little rooms was now quite bare, except the tiny attic
called her bedroom. in it were gathered the few trivial things she
prized as belonging to days that were less dark than these. there was a
necklace of coral, a collar of lace, a pair of gloves, kid, backed with
astrachan, the last present her uncle ever gave her; a tiny brooch of
gold, left by her aunt, and always worn by her, and but little else. one
other thing she found, a book that in that planet compares nearly to our
bible. sadly and lovingly she placed them all together, and kissed them
many times, her eyes blinded with tears; and then a voice whispered:

"why go back? go to this doctor. tell him everything, for he is kind.
none would blame you for not returning to that prison mansion, even
though under a promise. it was an unfair advantage."

but rosalie shook her head.

"i must go back, because i promised. i asked everything in return for
nothing. and god, in his own good time, will make the dark path plain."

the struggle gradually died, and right conquered.

at last she was ready to go. glancing round for the last time, she saw
upon the mantelpiece a key, a solitary one upon an iron ring.

"it belonged to uncle's safe, the one that had so little in it," she
thought. she took it up. its dull appearance suggested so much dull
tragedy to her. "i'll take it with me," she thought, and slipped it in
the pocket of her dress.

then she passed down the broad stone steps out once more into the
street. her brief holiday was over. the short hour was almost passed.
she clenched her hands together, and drove back the blinding tears that
struggled in her eyes. gradually she drew nearer to the avenue—how
eagerly she had rushed there on the night before! the great black marble
mansion came in view, its dusky grandeur having a certain sinister
lowering to her understanding eye no different from a prison.

"i wonder when i'll walk along this street again?" she thought, and
ascended the marble steps, hiding all trace of past emotion.

chapter viii
a book of inspiration

"the master wished to speak to you when you returned," the attendant at
the door said to her when he answered it.

rosalie crossed the hall, feeling that vague sense of satisfaction that
generally accompanies honesty, and which at times appears so poor a
recompense.

this time on knocking she waited for the answer. when it came she opened
the door and entered.

mr. barringcourt was in the act of filing papers, and generally tidying
up the littered table.

"you are quite punctual," said he. "and what is more, astoundingly
honest."

"you did not expect i should return, then?"

"no! honestly speaking, i thought i had seen the last of you."

she shook her head.

"gratitude brought me back at the expense of inclination."

"you should have yielded to temptation, and run away."

"perhaps my action in returning was not quite so commendable as you
think. i was much tempted to run away, and then—"

"what?"

"i could find no place to go to."

"you have no appreciative friends?"

"not one."

"the doctor?"

rosalie looked up quickly, and flushed. "why do you speak of him?"

"i'm sure i don't know," he answered drily; "i believe i was meaning
myself."

"oh—yes—of course," stammered rosalie. "i thought you meant dr. kaye."

"then you had notions of appealing to him?"

rosalie laughed. "you are not the pleasantest of companions."

"you might as well make a confidant of me. i am the only one you will
find for some time."

"well, yes, then," she answered, looking across at him with a timid
glance. "i thought of running to the doctor, informing him you intended
making a prisoner of me in a free city, and asking him to give me the
benefit of his protection and advice."

"and you thought better of it?"

"you told me if i was grateful i should return. i was grateful, and
though there seems something very topsy-turvy about the recompense you
ask for, there is something in it that appeals to my sense of justice."

"that is why you came back?"

"there is no other reason."

mr. barringcourt all this time had been sitting in his chair by the
table. rosalie was standing at the farther side of it. now he got up and
walked over to the fireplace, where the fire was burning brightly.

"what is your name?" he asked.

"rosalie paleaf."

"brought up by an aunt and uncle?"

"yes."

"always dumb, and therefore very much out of the world?"

"yes."

"where did you learn the little bit of knowledge you possess?"

"i listened to it. i was not deaf, you know."

"could you read?"

"yes, i can read. that is how i used to spend most of my time."

"travels, novels, or biography?"

"a little bit of both—all three, i mean. ‘the life of krimjo on the
desert island,' which was my favourite, contained a little of all, i
think."

"ally krimjo was only make-belief," said he ruthlessly.

"indeed he wasn't! he had gone through everything he spoke about, the
shipwreck and the loneliness, the savages and everything. make-belief!
oh, mr. barringcourt, have you ever really read it through?"

"yes, at the time it was written."

here rosalie laughed again triumphantly.

"that shows you don't know the book i'm talking about at all. the man
who wrote it lived hundreds of years ago. quite three hundred, i should
say."

"at that rate i must be mistaken. then if you are so fond of travel and
biography, i have some volumes here all on that subject, written, too,
about the time you speak of. you will have a great deal of time lie
heavy on your hands; perhaps you would like some?"

rosalie looked dubious, and her eyes travelled to the imposing-looking
book-shelves.

"i never found anyone quite to come up to ally krimjo," she replied
regretfully.

"you refuse my offer?"

"not if you give me something interesting. but as a rule i don't like
biographies, because the people always die. now, ally krimjo—"

"you're quite right," said mr. barringcourt grimly. "ally krimjo hasn't
died, so he deserves to live. have you the book of divine inspiration?"

"oh, yes! i don't suppose there's anyone without that?"

"here's one with pictures; look at it."

he took down from a shelf a heavy and ponderous volume of the book of
divine inspiration, as written and compiled in the planet lucifram, and
carried it without the least apparent effort to the table.

"now come and look at the pictures. i'll show you a few, and then you
can take it away with you and look at the rest."

he opened it at the first page—the frontispiece. it was a picture of the
golden serpent, so lifelike that its appearance was most startling. the
book, likewise, must have possessed the property of magnifying all
contained in it, for suddenly the head and coils and tails seemed to
enlarge to the same gigantic size as that within the temple.

"i don't like it. don't show me any more of that book," rosalie said.

"but why?" he asked, with apparent surprise.

"oh! i don't know," she answered, almost whispering. "it's the serpent.
i don't like it."

"but you are the young lady who was kissing its head, and throwing your
arms around it."

"yes, i know. that was because i did not understand."

"and now?"

"oh, now! i think it's cruel and deceitful."

"that's nothing short of blasphemy. the serpent is a god!"

"do you believe that?" she asked, suddenly looking up, and fixing his
eyes with a look as keen as it was serious.

two pairs of eyes, dark and light, each encountered one another—each
trying to read the other's secret—and both for once inscrutable, dark
and light alike.

"yes. i've got a pretty good mental digestion; it can take most things,"
he said, the corners of his mouth curving into a smile. "look!
miss—miss—what's your name, by the way?"

"my name is rosalie—rosalie paleaf."

"well now, miss paleaf, let us turn to the second picture."

reluctantly she turned round once more, to behold a forest jungle, as
fine and beautiful a scene as one could wish. its size and realism made
her put out her hand to pull a twig of feathery foliage, when suddenly
she was startled to see beneath it a pair of eyes, wild and yet
intelligent, gleaming out at her. it was an animal shaped and sized much
like a monkey. behind it was another of the same kind, a partner in its
joys and sorrows evidently.

rosalie sprang back.

"look at that hideous thing!" she cried in horror, pointing to it. then
recollecting herself, she said, with an effort at more self-control and
appreciation: "are—are they extinct now?"

"i don't know, i'm sure. what would _you_ say?"

"i sincerely hope so, i'm sure. put it away. there is something uncanny
about that book. that creature startled me."

"it's an acquired taste. here we come to another."

he had turned onward to a third picture, in which was shown a woman
sitting on the roots of a tree, the expression of her face long and
uncompromising, full of discontent. she wore no clothing, but her long
and silky hair was sufficient covering. she was of no particular beauty,
and her expression of discontent, mingled with curiosity, subtly
introduced, and having little intelligence to enlighten it, gave the
girl a feeling of repugnance. in one hand she held a fruit of brilliant
scarlet; a mouthful was being eaten, and its taste did not seem
altogether to her liking.

"what do you think of this?"

"i like it very little better. the man who painted it, judging from her
face, understood human nature, and had very little mercy for it."

"there you are mistaken. it is a caricature," he answered softly,
"painted one day by a man, and sent to his dearest friend—a woman."

"but she is eating a tomato."

"of course! let us continue."

the next picture showed this same woman standing beside a man who sat
upon a rock cracking nuts with his teeth. as rosalie looked the scenes
began to move and become lifelike, pretty much in the same way as a
cinematograph. at first the man did not perceive his companion, but
turning suddenly, in the act of taking a broken shell from his mouth, he
saw her holding the scarlet fruit, from which she had taken no more than
two fair mouthfuls. on seeing this his jaw dropped, his eyes expanded.

thin, far-away voices came from the picture, aiding the illusion.

"what for did you that?" said he, in a voice devoid of beauty and
expression.

"to find out," she replied, in the same manner.

"but we die—we die—if we eat fruit of blood colour!" he cried, with
superstitious horror in his voice.

"we no die, we live and grow fat. i eat, i live; but i miss something."

"what?"

"i know not. eat, and tell me." her look was cunning.

"i dare not."

"it is the best of all kinds—but for one thing."

"and what is dat?"

"eat, and tell me. you be my faithful love."

gingerly he took it in his hand, applied it reluctantly to his lips,
sucking the juice alone.

"it wants—"

his low forehead wrinkled. he could not formulate his thoughts.

"what?"

"it wants—"

and then all round a million voices echoed:

"_it wants but salt!_"

"salt!" he shouted, drowning the harmonic voices in his new discovery.

hereupon the woman fell upon her knees, and almost worshipped him,
kissing his hands and feet, weeping tears of pleasure on them.

"scrape me some up," he uttered, taking advantage of her low position.

she did it with her finger-nails.

"now stand back whilst i eat it."

"but i—i found it."

"stand back, goose, and watch me eat."

"i found it first," she whimpered.

"here's a seed—that's all you're worth," he answered. "now i go to find
more," said he, jumping up valiantly. "you bake bread and get me butter
for when i return."

"i come too!" she cried. "you eat the whole while i worky work."

"fool—toad—weasel—monkey! bake me the bread, or i your neck am
breaking!"

and with that they disappeared from the page. only the picture in its
first stage remained visible.

"that's not pretty at all," said rosalie.

"few things are in real life," he answered.

"but that was caricature."

"not in the way you think. it was caricature, i grant, but with a
difference."

"yes. i don't think the eating of salt with tomato could make a man
really superior, do you?"

"no; but it was the fact that he discovered salt."

"but he didn't. he was as ignorant as she till the voices whispered it."

"nevertheless, he caught the first sound."

"yes, of course," said rosalie thoughtfully.

here mr. barringcourt laughed.

"you do not appreciate its true absurdity," he said; "but that, maybe,
is scarcely necessary. now, that picture, or series of pictures, was
painted by a woman, and sent to the man who had sent her the first."

"but how about the voices?"

"oh! she was no ordinary woman, by any means."

"was she quarrelling with the man?"

"no. they were amusing each other in wet weather."

"they paint most beautiful scenery, but i don't like their men and
women."

"you are not intended to. now, shall we go on?"

"no; i'd rather not, really. it gives me headache, and i've had it ever
since yesterday afternoon, except for that little bit after you had
healed me."

"you are tired of the book of divine inspiration?"

"i'm tired of the pictures; they are no better than caricatures and
skits. i don't think that's a good book to keep in a house at all."

"you astound me! were you not brought up to worship the serpent?"

"yes; but the serpent disappointed me."

"i see. you only worship a god who is content to spoil you?"

she shook her head.

"i don't know," she said. "perhaps i'll settle down again before long."

"i hope so. has it ever struck you, miss paleaf, how completely you are
in my power?"

"no," she answered, looking at him quickly.

"well, you know, i found you in the temple, in the holiest place—the
place forbidden to women. do you know what the punishment for that
transgression is?"

"no."

"to have your tongue torn out by the roots."

"impossible!"

"not in the least. in this one interview with me you have said enough
against the serpent to set all its scales and coils bristling, and its
fangs working."

"i have said nothing."

"‘cruel and deceitful,' were not those your words?"

"yes; but to tear my tongue out would not be to prove it otherwise. the
serpent's wisdom should assert itself and prove the opposite. you were
also in the holiest place."

"of course; but for a man the offence is not so capital."

"tomatoes and salt," said rosalie, and she laughed. he laughed also.

"your impudence is only beaten by your ignorance."

"as often as i offend solely with my tongue, you must take the blame
yourself. i think you must have oiled the wheels too freely."

"it is a good thing you have no relatives, miss paleaf; they would have
missed you, disappearing so suddenly."

"under the circumstances, i suppose it is."

"were you happy with them?"

"oh, yes! as happy as the day, when we were in prosperity. but this last
year has been nothing but shadow and poverty, and i don't think i ever
realised how many things i had to be thankful for till they were all
gone."

"the gift of speech does not compensate for all things, then?"

"i don't know. i have had it so short a time."

"you are longing for freedom, and can find nothing to compensate for the
bitterness of its loss. is not that it?"

"i don't think it is only that. my aunt was only buried the day before
yesterday. i should be very callous and ungrateful if i could forget her
so readily."

"yet you cannot deny the events of the past day have put a great gulf
betwixt you and her."

"yes; i could think she had died a year ago along with uncle. poor
thing! it would have been so much better if she had done so, i think."

"how long do you think your term of imprisonment will last?"

rosalie shook her head.

"i don't know. the future has always been a blank to me. i never built
those castles in the air that many love to build."

"how about your prayer to find a tongue?"

"i don't know. i longed to speak, but never looked into a future crowned
by successful prayer."

"well, your term of imprisonment here lasts three years."

"it is a long time."

"on the contrary, reckoned justly, a very short one."

"what do you mean by ‘reckoned justly'?"

he took up a bundle of filed papers from the table.

"these are accounts of long standing," he answered gravely. "it is
strange how quickly a high rate of interest accumulates. what you wipe
off in three years or less by ready payments, some are leaving till a
future date, till it accumulates and doubles, then maybe trebles, and
some day swamps them."

rosalie's eyes opened with unfeigned surprise.

"but whom is the money owed to?"

"to me."

"have you all those debtors?"

"these are a few—a very few. people find out the softness of my heart,
and then they come to me. women with stingy husbands and extravagant
tastes, men with limited brains and boundless ambition. each and all,
with many other pleas and reasons, call upon me and win me over to their
way of thinking. i am always won. no simple-hearted fool within the
country gives in more easily than i when i can gain security of person."

"but don't you tell them that you expect return?"

"no; i like them to think there's one generous person in the world."

"but that is scarcely fair. you ought to tell them what you want."

"the argument would be beyond them. besides, it would come then too much
like making bargains. i am no shopman. those who seek me find me. others
stay away."

"but this is nothing short of madness. how can you make people pay
without a signature or anything?"

"i never jest but when it suits my purpose. and for madness, i grant
upon the surface it may appear as such. but each bill works
backward—item by item, year by year. mathematicians and philosophers
looking through them would find a subject more than fascinating."

"but if when you show your bill the people refuse to pay, and say they
never got the goods?"

"why, then, one little snip and the fabric ravels out again, loop by
loop, as it was knitted up. back it goes to the fundamental working, as
rigid as machinery, as true as time, and ends in nothingness."

rosalie was silent for a time, and then she said: "is that how it is you
are such a rich man?"

but he shook his head.

"i am poorer than many people think," he answered. "and richer
too—wealth is comparative. but now," he continued, with more energy, "i
have come to the conclusion that your term of prison life shall not be
quite so dull as you expected. you may come to me at any time, provided
i have leisure. moreover, you may borrow any book; amongst all these
there will be surely some to suit you, even though it be but a uniquely
pictured book of ally krimjo."

"but what are you expecting in return? you say you like people to esteem
you generous, and are not in reality so at all. this generosity to me
may end in nothing but a high percentage. it may bring me down to
nothingness."

"you have the advantage of being young, you see. i might end your debtor
if i tied you up in an unsympathetic prison, and let you out at last, to
find i was too late, and your spirit killed by solitude."

he was looking at her with a puzzled and thoughtful expression, as if
trying to weigh or settle something in his mind to his own satisfaction.

"i think you were easier to understand dumb than you are speaking," he
said at last.

"well, yes, because i would be less complex," said rosalie wisely. "i
was minus something before, now i'm not."

"maybe. when will you come to visit me again?"

"to-morrow morning, if i may. from twelve to one?"

"yes. we'll arrange for that hour twice a week. it will be neither too
long nor too often to bore either of us. the rest of the time you'll
spend as best you can within the house and gardens."

chapter ix
mariana

rosalie went away again, upstairs to that corridor on which the rooms in
which she lived were situated. another meal was there in readiness, for
the hour was now past one. she ate with little heart, the silent
attendant by her side unwittingly depressing her. when the meal was over
she went to a little sitting-room which mariana had shown her, taking
her small parcel of belongings with her, and shut the door.

here a fire was burning, the only one in that particular wing, for they
seemed to be chary of fires here. the room had little of brightness
about it otherwise. its walls were panelled oak without design or
ornament. an oaken table on three legs, a few high-backed chairs, a rug
before the fireplace, polished boards the floor; that was all. a narrow
window looked out upon the blank wall opposite, giving the room a
gloomy, darkened look. yet there was something about this simply
furnished room that rosalie liked. it was less luxurious than any other
in that house which she had visited.

she drew one of the high-backed chairs toward the fire, and sat down,
her feet upon the fender. she had taken her small book of divine
inspiration from the parcel, and sat holding it idly in her hands,
staring at the flames. after all, it was comforting to be able to hold
something, something familiar and not strange, something that had been
handled and read by loving hands and eyes, though now they were passed
away for ever.

for rosalie, despite her behaviour downstairs, was only playing a part.
laughing or answering, there had been ever in her heart the serpent's
tooth. it gnawed and stung with almost unendurable pain. o god! to be
but rid of it for five sweet minutes.

so far as rosalie was concerned, there were no late dinners in this
house of mystery. she had ordinary tea at five o'clock, and then the
lights for the evening were brought in, and the red curtains drawn.
about seven mariana knocked at the door, and entered.

"this is my evening for playing," said she quietly; "would you care to
come and listen to me?"

"thank you; i should like to come very much. what do you play?"

"play? oh! i always play on a violin; it's my favourite amusement. it's
the way i always spend my night out."

"night out," thought rosalie; "what an expression coming from her lips!"

aloud she said: "i'm very fond of music. have you learnt long?"

"i don't remember learning, but i suppose i must have done."

she led the way along the corridor, down the slippery stairs, and turned
in at the glass door leading from the central hall towards mr.
barringcourt's study; but she did not go there. instead, she paused at a
door next to it on the same side. she passed in, and held the door for
rosalie to follow. the room within was dark, but it must have overlooked
the avenue, for lights from the outside shone weirdly in through the
long windows, lighting up short lines of furniture, half a grand piano,
a strip of table, an ottoman, and a piece of wall.

mariana turned on one light. it was soft and shaded, but had not
strength enough to illuminate the whole room. the farther corners were
entirely in the shade.

"will you not turn on more lights?" asked rosalie.

"no; i like the twilight best. i can think and feel better when the
light is low."

then she uncased the violin which she had brought down with her, and
tried the strings, testing them by the piano, which was now a little
better brought to view.

rosalie went over to a window—it was the natural instinct of a
prisoner—and looked out of it with hungry eyes.

passing, passing, never ceasing, went the traffic, and through the
closed windows came the muffled sound of horses' feet, and wheels, and
voices. feverishly she scanned each face as closely as she could in the
distance; but she read nothing on them but what one reads on a hundred
faces every day. her heart beat with an aching longing to touch the
pavement again with free feet. three years! it was a lifetime. one day
in a house like this contained an agony of years.

"i am impatient," she said, and closed her lips patiently and tight.

she had forgotten mariana's music—in the testing of the chords—till
suddenly, after a short pause, she began to play.

rosalie's attention was first divided between the music and the street.
what was played seemed to fit in with her mood—a simple air of sadness.
but this harmonic accompaniment had its dangers, for by degrees rosalie
felt her spirits, instead of keeping pace with it, begin to follow. then
the street claimed her attention less, the music absorbing it. and at
last she turned round reluctantly and looked toward the player. mariana,
never an ordinary-looking woman, was by the one pale light quite
extraordinary. the long graceful robe she wore made her look more than
commonly tall. her pretty arms, white and delicate yet, full of a
certain indefinable strength, and the ivory whiteness of her face, had a
curious charm and fascination in the dim lights. but beside her playing,
the musician herself was insignificant. from sadness her notes changed
to melancholy, from melancholy on to misery, from misery to despair.
despondency, tragedy, hopeless complaint, and restless, weary wandering
on those spiritual wastes where no light comes, or even narrow track to
show that ever pilgrim passed before—this was her music.

her face as she played betrayed no great emotion. the brightness in her
eyes spoke more of mental activity and retrospection than of sentiment.
gradually the listener's eyes fell on the furniture around. much of it,
in conjunction with the rest of the house, was of polished oak, carved
finely and curiously. opposite there was a cabinet museum about the
height of a man, and above it the carved head of some idolater's god,
growing in clearness as she became accustomed to the light

but surely the music had affected it. its ugly eyes, protruding and rid
of all intelligence, altered slowly to expression almost human. for
every quivering note struck from the violin found a resting-place within
these staring orbs, filling them both with misery. their dumb speech was
terrible, but when rosalie moved away, more ghastly still by reason of
their persistence. she looked away. there on the floor beside her was a
tiger-skin, a rug of worth and beauty, with a head and glassy eyes. its
eyes met hers. their dumb misery told a tale beyond the power of speech.
shivering, she turned and moved away.

when would mariana stop and take her from this wretched room? she had
moved within range of the statues, those dim, misty forms of whiteness
which rose like ghosts with out and upstretched arms to beckon her.
faces of cold, white, and deathly beauty, and eyes! oh, terrible! all
gazing into hers with that sad gaze and straining misery, reaching to
the height and depth of agony.

it was enough. had they but wailed, or cried, or uttered sound, the
spell had broken. but here was silence—ghastly, terrible, because so
secret and so unexpected.

at last the tension reached a limit. on all sides rosalie encountered
ghastly faces of long-suffering pain to which the music seemed to form a
fitting background. turning hurriedly to escape one face belonging to a
child, set in a picture hung upon the wall, her glance fell by chance
upon the mirror and revealed herself, strained horror in her eyes, with
blanched cheeks and open lips. she scarcely recognised who stood there.
it was enough. she crossed the room half running, and clutched mariana's
arm.

"how much longer?"

"the time is up. alas! how quickly it has passed. never again till next
week, and then but two short hours. and yet you ask me, ‘how much
longer?'"

"can you play like that, and never feel it?"

mariana shook her head.

"it's the only time i ever feel, the only time i ever live."

"but it is pain and sorrow."

"better than emptiness. now i have lost the only thing i love. all week
it lies quite mute, a thing of idleness, bursting with life. and when i
take it up it utters so long a wail, so sad a sigh, that my heart
returns to it, and we weep together till pain becomes an ecstasy and
sadness joy."

"oh, mariana! what a life is yours!"

"no different from the rest. a life of grey to-morrows that come and go
in endless twilight."

"will you feel like this to-morrow?"

"no. to-morrow brings a calm existence. to-night i fill my heart with
tears."

"what was it brought you here?"

"oh! i loved not wisely, but too well, this little fiddle."

"and has it brought you to this pass?"

"yes, if pass you call it."

"then, mariana, give it up!"

for her the dimness of the room had vanished, its fantasies and ghostly
shadows thrown off with one great effort. she grasped the other's arms
in both her hands, and stared at her, taller by her sudden force and
fierceness. the other looked at her, and then recoiled.

"give it up! the only joy of life—the only life beyond a dull existence!
why, i should die—the very thought would kill me."

"no! it would make you live!"

but mariana only looked at her, and shook her head.

"rosalie, can i play? can you make anything out of it?"

"i never heard such music; but it is wrong—it's the wrong sort."

then mariana came close up to her, just as before she had drawn back,
and, with a sudden weakness, drooped her head upon the other's shoulder,
clasping her hands about her waist.

"don't say that!" she cried, her voice little above a whisper. "i cannot
bear it. i can do nothing more. there is no time. once or twice i asked
the master would he listen, and he did. but he said there was no tune in
what i played, no harmony of any sort—that all was a delusion, a fancy
of my brain."

"but that was not the truth." and rosalie held her very tight, that
woman who in the morning had seemed so strong to her. "and he only said
it because he knew you would be fool enough to take it all to heart."

"hush! hush! it's treason to talk like that."

"nothing's treason but failure. you follow my advice, and give up the
fiddle. then after a while you'll get it back again in such a way that
even mr. barringcourt will not be able to say there's no tune in it."

mariana looked at her, with surprise and misunderstanding on every
feature.

"i can't give it up. i'm bound to play for two hours every wednesday
night, harmony or discord."

"why bound?"

"it was the stipulation i made when first i came here. it's the kind of
thing one can't break through."

"you don't want to?"

"no, i don't; but if i did i could not."

"you would rather live for two hours a week than seven times
twenty-four?"

"i don't understand you."

"no, and never will."

it was mr. barringcourt's voice, and he spoke from the door, through
which he had entered.

chapter x
a conversation in shadows

when mr. barringcourt was in it, the great black house held its
mysteries and shadows; without him they seemed aggravated fourfold. not
long after the wednesday evening music, rosalie stood in the centre of
the hall suddenly smitten with the most chilly fear she had ever
experienced in her life. no noise, no sound, not even the wind without,
penetrated those walls of iron marble. shadows and silence in endless
vista met her eye. shadows and silence like a sigh congealed, changed
from nothingness into reality.

dreading the loneliness, and her own want of nerve to go upstairs, she
went to the door and accosted the keeper there.

"does this house frighten you?" she asked.

"not at all," he answered, most politely.

"that is strange, because i feel most frightened here. it is not
haunted, is it?"

"what do you mean?"

"there are no—no ghosts?"

he smiled. "that depends upon your imagination, i should say."

"i want to go upstairs, and i dare not. you don't think me very foolish,
do you?"

"where is mariana? does she not look after you?"

"yes. but she went away, nearly an hour ago."

"shall i call her?"

"oh, please do!"

he touched a bell, and a minute later mariana appeared coming down the
staircase. she looked as calm as ever. the short outburst of the evening
had died away.

"i'm sorry to trouble you. but i really could not come upstairs alone.
the house was so quiet that it frightened me."

"you will get accustomed to the silence by degrees," she answered, and
led the way towards the staircase.

when they reached the little sitting-room where the fire burnt, rosalie
was pleased to find a white cloth laid there, with supper on it. it was
a very plain repast, but cheerful, possibly because of the bright lamp
and firelight.

"when do you have your supper?" she asked of mariana.

"i have had mine."

"what is the time?"

"almost ten o'clock."

"how late! that is the time i generally go to bed. what time do you go?"

"as soon as you are settled for the night i shall retire."

"where do you sleep?"

"in the next room to yours. if you want anything in the night, you may
ring or come to me."

"but then i should have to come out on to the corridor. i hate
corridors."

"no. my bedroom opens into yours. your door that opens into the passage
is locked at night."

"by whom?"

"by me."

"why do you lock it?"

"i don't know, i'm sure. you are safer with it locked, i expect."

"how long have you lived here, mariana?"

"three years this autumn."

"and how long has mr. barringcourt been here?"

"the same length of time. i came with him."

"and you are happy here?"

"i could not be happier—under the circumstances."

"were you ever happier?"

"i think i was once. but it is a very long time ago. i don't remember
how long, so that it cannot really matter."

"where did you live before you lived here?"

she shook her head.

"i can't quite remember. i think it was a very cold and dark place, and
one day mr. barringcourt came and asked me would i like to go away."

"and you accepted?"

"yes. i wanted to get warm again."

"and are you warm?"

"yes. every wednesday night. if it were not for that i should grow cold
again."

a silence. then:

"who lived here before mr. barringcourt?"

"a man who died. his name was geoffrey todbrook."

"what?"

"geoffrey todbrook."

"why, he's the man who started homes for incurables. there was one for
the dumb and deaf and blind. i should have gone there."

"i have heard he was very charitable. he left this house to mr.
barringcourt."

"were they related?"

"no; i rather think myself the master had let it to him on a lease. then
when the lease expired he died, and left a will to smooth all
difficulties."

"was mr. barringcourt living in the city before mr. todbrook's death?"

"oh, no! i don't think he had ever been here before. he took me to the
opera one wednesday night, and he said it was only the second time he
had been there."

"the opera? did you like it?"

"yes, i liked it; but it made my head ache. i was trying to remember
something all the time."

"do you often go out with him?"

"oh, no; that would be to get oneself talked about. besides, so long as
we remain here, i am but a servant."

"why does mr. barringcourt keep me here?"

"i expect you have some secret he wishes to discover, otherwise he would
not trouble himself about you. when he took me to the opera it was to
discover something."

"what?"

"i don't know."

"then how can you tell?"

"because, up to the time we went, and through the performance, he was
very affable to me. afterwards he took no more notice of me, and never
has done."

"don't you hate him?"

"why should i? i had no secret. his conduct was permissible; and i had
rather be left alone."

"and what secret can i have that he should be agreeable to me?"

"i cannot tell. perhaps, like me, you have none. but if you have, rest
assured you will not leave this house till it has been discovered."

"have you ever had anyone staying here before in the same way that i
am?"

"not in my time. people with secrets worth knowing are few and far
between."

"then what can make the master think such an insignificant person as i
could hold a secret?"

"i cannot tell. i only said it might be so; there is no other reason why
he should tolerate your company?"

rosalie laughed, despite a very uneasy feeling in her mind.

"do you ever have company here?"

"yes. last christmas there was a ball, and we had two or three dinner
parties and entertainments. lady flamington generally acts as hostess.
she and sir james are very friendly with mr. barringcourt."

"what is she like?"

"very beautiful, i think, with very pleasing manners. she must be so to
please the master; he is so hard to please."

"perhaps she has a secret?"

"oh, no; i hardly think so. he makes a convenience of her."

"good gracious!" and rosalie laughed. "you don't give him an enviable
character."

"i speak as truthfully as my perceptions allow me; but at times i may be
wrong."

"and does she not resent being made a convenience of?"

"no; it is only self-respect that keeps her from falling in love with
him."

"is he then so agreeable to her?"

"he gives her everything that is not worth the having."

"what do you mean?"

"he gives her everything but love."

"but that, with a husband, no one would want."

mariana's eyebrows rose. "there are double marriages on lucifram, i'm
given to understand."

"yes; but no one thinks much of a woman who marries twice, unless she is
a widow."

"indeed," mariana answered, and was silent.

"but is mr. barringcourt fond of no one?" rosalie pursued.

"i never heard of anyone. he is cold and proud, and often takes no
trouble to hide it."

"but then there are so many good and beautiful women in the world."

"they find partners, perhaps, that need them more."

after another silence rosalie continued: "and mr. todbrook—what did he
die of?"

"i think he went down the back staircase."

"in his own house?"

"yes."

"what do you mean?"

"he died."

"in which room?"

"the one the master sleeps in now. there is a portrait of him in the
picture-gallery. to-morrow you shall see it."

"what did he die of?"

"he had quick ears. he heard the spirit voices calling, and he went to
them."

"painlessly?"

"like one sailing on a sea of glass. they say his end was merciful; and
i know it was. he suffered nothing—he suffers nothing now."

"is he in heaven?"

"i doubt there was too little pain for that; but yet i cannot tell. he
may have suffered previously. men's lives are strange. and the roughest
rocks are coated by smooth waters. they keep their secrets all too
well."

"i'm tired, mariana. shall we go to bed?"

"yes. when you wish it."

so they rose and went together to the bedroom, which had a chilly air in
it after the cosy room. when at last rosalie was in bed, mariana
smoothed the coverlet and tucked the bed-clothes in.

"leave me a light, won't you?"

"yes; i'll put it on this table. but there is nothing to fear. an easy
conscience may sleep well here, secure from harm." she moved away, but
after a few steps returned. she stooped over the bed and kissed
rosalie's brow. "good-night, little one. sleep peacefully till
daybreak." and then she went away.

big tears rose in rosalie's eyes, for the words had awakened in her a
terrible longing for love and companionship, stronger and more powerful
than ever mariana, in her terribly set existence, could ever know how to
give. for rosalie felt that she was even now the stronger of the two,
and wept for mariana's solitude as well as her own.

chapter xi
garden and house of shadows

the next morning the sensation of waking in such fine surroundings had
lost all its charm. rosalie awoke with a dull leaden pain at her heart,
that gained rather than lost power as she recalled one by one the
articles of furniture in this new home. the long mirror had lost its
fascination; so had the silken bed-hangings. she did not jump out of
bed, but rather lay there idly, with no wish to rise; oppressed with
such a heaviness that to lie still seemed the only ease from all those
aches and pains that twine around a heavy heart. as the grey light of
early morning brightened and broadened, she curled in among the
bed-clothes, and shut her eyes.

"if only they would let me lie here, and not disturb me! i would never
disturb them, i'm sure. i feel so weary that the least exertion is the
biggest effort."

then she lay very still for a long time, till at last mariana knocked at
the door and opened it, bringing the customary cup of tea.

"i feel so tired, mariana," rosalie said, "and there's nothing to do.
don't you think i might spend the day in bed?"

"it is against the rules."

"who makes all the rules here?"

"the master."

"but he has gone away till to-morrow."

"that does not excuse us."

"but he would never know unless you told. i am tired, really, mariana. i
could just lie still, and never move an inch all day."

"you must get up."

"when i get up my heart aches."

"that does not enter into the consideration of the rule. you must get
up, or you will be shaken out when the bed is made."

so very reluctantly rosalie rose, with a day of nothingness and
imprisonment before her. she was dressed in about the same time as
yesterday, had breakfast served in the same room in the same way, and
then walked out on to the corridor aimlessly and disconsolately.

mariana had disappeared. although rosalie tried every door along the
corridor she could not find her. many of these were locked, and others
she discovered to be bedrooms, furnished much as her own, with the
exception of the little sitting-room and the room in which she had her
meals.

at last, weary of this, she passed out to the high gallery overreaching
the square central hall. she walked round it, and tried various doors
leading off from it, but all were locked. below, the dim hall lay in
silence. nothing of light or life was there, though it was not yet
mid-day. she looked down over the high oaken balustrade, and sighed, and
the echo brought her sigh back to her. she whispered "rosalie"; the word
ran round the arching dome, and then returned—a mocking, hollow voice
within the silence. so the morning crept away, with no brightness to
speed its dragging hours, no companionship, no occupation. not a sound
fell on her ear. so still was everything, the house might have been a
city of the dead.

at dinner-time she ate mechanically the food they placed before her. to
refuse was simply to raise up insistence. then she withdrew to the
little sitting-room, to idle away what time would go, to find after
endless waiting that scarcely an hour had passed. then she got up and
went back to the bedroom to bring her hat, and with the same difficulty
as the day before, reached with safety the foot of the spiral staircase.

the doorkeeper was sitting not far away from it, reading a paper. she
went towards him, and as she approached him he looked up, and then rose
from his seat.

"would you mind telling me which way i should go to find the garden?"
she asked.

"certainly. if you will come this way i will take you."

rosalie smiled sadly.

"suppose somebody got out or in whilst you are away?"

"no one would wish to go out, and the door only opens from within," he
answered.

he walked across the hall, and she followed him to the glass door behind
the staircase. this door likewise entered upon a corridor with doors
leading from either side of it. the house seemed all doors, but at the
farther end a spacious fernery opened out, the curtains (of deep red)
which shut it off being now looped and drawn back, so that much beyond
was visible. through the magnificent fern-house he led her till they
came to a door of glass leading down into the garden beyond.

the doorkeeper opened it, and let her pass through, himself following.

outside, broad flights of steps descended by terraces to a lawn of
smoothest grass. the terraces were paved in large squares of black and
white marble, and from the central one a huge fountain was sending up
showers of sparkling water to meet the brilliant sun. beds of flowers,
all of colours resembling scarlet geraniums, were laid out bordering the
side walks. one magnificent bed of what looked like crimson gladioli ran
up a steep bank bordering the left-hand wall. the high walls themselves
were covered with creepers, all of brilliant red, just as autumn leaves
are often found, and the only relief afforded was that of the dark
foliage of the trees that clustered willow fashion in the rear portion
of the garden. this was a kind of wooded avenue along which a carriage
drive led from the big gates in the outer wall round to those stables
where the master's favourite horses were.

"this is the garden," said her companion, when he had brought her so
far; "you will return any time before five. after that the doors are
locked."

when rosalie was left alone she walked across the lawn slowly, taking in
all the beauty and striking nature of the scene. the gardens were large.
the avenue and shrubbery beyond were shaded, and provided with many
rustic and artistic seats. rosalie walked along the carriage drive as
far as she could, and then a sudden and unaccountable gloom seemed to
fall upon her and all things. just then a sudden bend in the road
brought her full in view of the stables. it seemed to her for one
instant as if against the gloom surrounding her they shone out in
flashing whiteness. they were flat-roofed, though high, and the strong
pillars supporting and ornamenting the building were an exact fac-simile
of those used in the decoration of the temple.

and standing there looking at it, rosalie smiled.

"i wonder whose idea that was?" she thought. "a devout architect and
designer would never have thought of such a thing. but perhaps i'm
mistaken; this may be a private place of worship. i'll go on and see."

so she advanced as far as the building; but whether it were stable or
chapel she could not tell, for it possessed no doorway. she walked
around it as far as she could on either side, till prevented by a wall
of great height, but found nothing to serve as a clue as to the nature
of its use. no sound came from within—none of the odour that generally
characterises such places, either of sanctity or horses—and for the
third time rosalie walked round with growing curiosity. marble, marble,
all was marble, cold and hard and lifeless.

"i really think granite would be a welcome change," she said, and sighed
and walked away.

but it was really pleasant and enjoyable to be in the open air. to be
able to look up at a sky that belonged in common to prisoners and free
men, there was some little consolation in that.

as she emerged once more from the wooded avenue, her eye fell full on
the house. she was surprised and startled at its beauty, viewed thus
from the back. whereas looking at it from the street it showed as
nothing but a large square mansion, almost ugly in its plainness, it was
from here one of the most graceful and artistic buildings she had ever
seen. it was turreted and towered, with polished oriel windows, shining
with a lustre all their own against the dusky background of dark marble.
the windows on the basement all opened on the ground.

"i believe this is the front, and the front is the back," thought she.
"a kind of topsy-turvy, like the rest of things. what a magnificent
door!"

this last expression escaped her involuntarily and aloud.

the door from which she had come was a small side one leading from the
conservatory of palms and ferns, but in the centre of this huge
construction of glass was a double door of thick carved glass, or some
substance very like it, of fine workmanship and execution.

rosalie went up the many steps towards it, passing the silver fountain
that fell with almost a merry sound into the marble basin. both leaves
of the door were shut, and the carving represented was that of a temple,
the inner portion, with arched aisles and fluted pillars, and in the
centre an altar, with above it the image of a toad. below it, on the
steps outside the customary railing, bowed figures knelt in bare feet,
their shoes and stockings at some considerable distance. the
representation was comprehensive. each figure and detail was drawn with
great exactness and clearness. the curious polish it possessed was its
most striking feature, especially that brilliancy radiating from the
toad. rosalie bent her eyes closer to it, shuddered to find that there
was something horribly repulsive in such an animal, and then found
herself attracted by the light shining from its head. its eyes were
meaningless and staring, even in the carved picture, but from its head,
and this she only discovered after steady looking, the light shone very
curiously. instead of the white light of the rest, this was almost red.
just a faint tinge of red! all the rest, carved as it were from blocks
of ice, was utterly lifeless. yet it was this tinge of colour, so subtly
introduced, which made the whole great difference between an
uninteresting and an interesting thing. at last she left it and looked
down once more into the garden. she saw that several narrow paths led
into the shrubberies at the sides. but what struck her attention most
was that glorious rising bank of scarlet lilies and harebells and
gladioli, that extended right down one side to the wooded avenue beyond,
and reached almost to the height of the wall.

she perceived a narrow winding path led up this bank to its summit, and
there a garden seat was placed. this was the highest point of vantage in
the garden.

"i believe if i could only get up there i should be able to see away
over the opposite wall, for it's lower!" she cried excitedly. "oh, how
glorious to be able to see the city and everything! i'll go."

but alas! from the times of cinderella downwards, clocks have often had
a knack of striking at an awkward time. and now there came the sound of
chimes, the silver warning, and then the five plain strokes that told
the closing hour of fettered liberty.

rosalie re-entered the house. in the central hall she met mariana coming
from the entrance door in hat and jacket, and carrying a muff.

"where have you been?" she cried, running across to her.

"out for a walk."

"oh, mariana! what a shame never to tell me, and never to take me!" and
she took hold of her hands hungrily, and kissed her on either cheek.

"why do you kiss me?" the other asked, smiling.

"to try to get some real fresh air into my lips."

"it is not very fresh. there is quite a fog coming on."

"ah! but it's free air. i feel all the better just for kissing you. but
why do you never take me?"

"it is against the rules."

"but why can you go, and not i?"

"i'm sure i don't know. see, i have brought you some sweets," and
mariana held out a very pretty box containing a delicious assortment of
chocolates.

rosalie took it, somehow more touched than she liked to show by this
simple little act of graciousness.

"come and sit with me after tea, and let us eat them together."

"i am afraid i cannot. i am always busy in the evening."

"what are you doing?"

"making a wedding-dress."

"are you going to marry, then?"

"oh, no; i'm not making it for myself. i don't know that it is a
wedding-dress either. however, i am making it very beautifully, and so i
am ambitious for it."

"who is going to wear it?"

here mariana's brow puckered, and a puzzled, tired look came on to her
face.

"i don't know," she answered. "i expect if i finish it, and no one
applies for it or wants it, it will shrivel up again. for there is no
wardrobe but what is overrun with moths; and the moths here eat away all
colours except red and black."

"then how can you preserve it till it's done?"

"by steeping the silk i sew it with in tears. but when the last stitch
is in the effect has gone. the moths cannot perceive the bitterness
afterwards. they eat it all away."

rosalie stared at her, as well she might.

"won't you let me see it?" she asked at length; but mariana shook her
head.

"it would be no pleasure to you."

"indeed it would. let me see it, mariana, just for one minute. there can
be possibly no harm in that."

"the room i sew in is very damp for such as you."

"but i'm stronger than you. i'm accustomed to hard work."

the other looked at her and smiled, with more sadness than mirth in her
expression.

"what strange ideas you get about things, rosalie. the work i do would
kill you in a month."

"but you will let me come with you, will you not?"

"yes, if you wish it very much. after tea at six o'clock i will come for
you."

chapter xii
an act of disobedience

at six o'clock mariana knocked at the little sitting-room door, and
rosalie opened it, quite ready to accompany her, armed with the box of
sweets.

"you must not bring those," said the elder woman.

"but i want you to have some."

"i'm not like you. i'm not fond of sweets, and have no intention of
making my fingers sticky."

then rosalie put them down, and followed her in silence and obedience.

they went downstairs together, and took the door opening into the
central hall to the right, the one through which rosalie had not yet
passed.

but at the threshold rosalie stood still. it seemed to her as if a great
spider's web was barring their further progress. a breath of darkness
and dampness was wafted out to meet them, and inclination bade her turn
back there and then. mariana evidently noticed nothing of this
hesitation; she passed through the door, and held it open for rosalie to
follow. the gigantic cobweb was nothing but delusion evidently, and
melted into nothingness.

"don't shut the door," rosalie whispered; but it had closed silently
even as she spoke.

and here was darkness and cold dampness. she heard her heart beat wildly
in the stillness, and groped for mariana's arm. it seemed cold and
lifeless, having no animation.

"can't we get a light?" she whispered, with dry lips, and her voice
sounded hollow in her own hearing.

"the light is farther down the passage."

that, at least, was reassurance. it was mariana's voice, no different
from what it ever was, just as subdued and gentle.

by degrees her eyes became accustomed to the intense gloom, and when
mariana turned on the one flickering light, she recognised a length of
passage similar to that in the other two wings. but here the doors were
all quite low, and made of plain black wood. there was no attempt at
adornment. the floor was plain wood, the walls, the ceilings, and
everything was dreary, damp, and cold.

the doors, too, were numbered all in red, and it was before no. 13 that
mariana stopped. it opened to her touch, and together they entered.

"this is the room i work in," said mariana, and again turned on one
feeble light. it seemed the only one in the chamber.

the black rafters of oak hung low above their heads, and their heaviness
perhaps helped to increase the gloomy aspect of the place. a long table
of deal ran down the centre, with a chair at either end. this table was
covered with a white cloth reaching the ground on either side.

two chests of oak, shabby and worn, were the only articles of furniture
the room possessed. the walls were whitewashed. here and there the
plaster had fallen from them, with a dispiriting effect. there was
neither fireplace nor window in the room.

"can you work in here?" rosalie asked, looking round with an involuntary
shiver.

"yes. one becomes accustomed to surroundings. i never notice them; i'm
too absorbed."

she went to the table and drew away the cloth, folding it, and placing
it upon one of the vacant chairs. below, a shimmer of satin, and gold,
and silver, all strikingly in contrast to the bareness and poorness of
the room, met the eye.

"how lovely!" said rosalie, drawing her breath. "do you know, i thought
that big white cloth was the material, and it looked to my eyes more
like a shroud."

"this is only the material," said mariana. "i finished it the day you
came, after being engaged on it three years. it is all hand-spun and
woven, but now i've put the loom and spinning-wheel away in those big
chests. one does not want too many things about."

"but who taught you?"

"oh! it is knowledge one acquires. it needs a certain kind of brain and
a given pattern, that is all."

then she went over to one of the chests and opened it, and took from it
a parcel which she untied. it contained a quantity of most lovely lace,
the like of which rosalie had never seen before.

"did you make this?" she asked.

"no; it belongs to the master. i found it in the lumber rooms among the
attics, and asked him for it, and so he gave it to me."

"gave it to you? it looks almost priceless."

"i know—reckoned from some standpoints. but i liked the design. it is
lovers' knots, and sprays of lily of the valley. have you noticed it?"

"yes."

"it was that that put it in my head about the wedding-dress. when i have
finished, it will be a beautiful creation."

"but do not the moths attack the lace?"

"oh, no; you see it belongs to the master, otherwise it would have been
eaten long ago."

"but why do you not wear it yourself, if he gave it to you?"

again the tired, puzzled look came over mariana's face.

"i have no use for it. besides—i don't know. i think it has something to
do with sacrifice or freedom. i can't tell which."

"will you give it to lady flamington, do you think?"

"i shall not give it to anyone, except the one who asks."

"but you will be besieged."

"how can that be when no one knows about it?" and she spread the lace
upon the ivory satin, and drew it into graceful folds, just as an
understanding artist would. as she did so, even by the meagre light
rosalie perceived its exquisite beauty.

"who is to be fitted for it?" she asked.

"i don't know. one does not like to trouble people; i think i shall use
my own discretion. after all, i scarcely hope that anyone will wear it."

"could i be of use to you?"

"it is too cold for you to take off your dress."

"oh, no! let me do it, just to feel i've done something in the day."

"thank you," said mariana. "you are neither too tall nor short. i think
it would show to advantage on a figure like yours. i'll fit it for just
such a one as you."

she cut a piece from the soft piles of satin, and began to shape it to a
bodice lining.

"are you going to try it on with _satin_?" asked rosalie, astounded at
such extravagance.

"yes; inside and out must be both alike for a perfect finish. i might
use silk, but i prefer the same material."

what a marvellous fitter on she was! and yet how wonderfully patient
rosalie stood, the whole long evening through. it was no light twenty
minutes—not even an hour—but dragged out into three.

mariana forgot herself evidently in her occupation, and had no mercy on
the model she was fitting. she treated her as a thing of wood and stone
till she had realised the full effect in fit of bodice, skirt, and
train, which, when perfected, she removed and folded into tissue papers,
all labelled for the purpose near at hand. then suddenly when all was
finished she looked at her, and saw how deathly white her face had grown
under the lengthened strain.

"ah! now you are ill, and i am to blame for it," she said.

but rosalie shook her head, though she shivered.

"it's the cold; everything is so damp down here."

"yes. indeed, it has been kind of you. i never hoped to get a model. we
can't ask favours of each other here, and i'm sorry if i tired you;
but—but—i don't know whether it may not be against the rule, so it was
best to complete it before the master came, in order to plead
ignorance."

truly this last was the most human thing mariana had ever said to her,
the only deviation from a hard, set rule of living.

"yes," said rosalie, smiling despite the faintness and shivering that
overcame her. "when you've done a thing no one can say anything, can
they? at least, they can't say much."

mariana helped her on with her customary dress, and just then the clock
outside struck nine.

"my work-time is up now," she said. "i will return with you."

perhaps no one ever greeted fire, and light, and warmth as rosalie did
when back in the small sitting-room in the storey up above. in bed at
night she remembered the moths that had flickered round the dim light,
and round her also, as if claiming this work as soon as finished, and
identifying her with it, so it almost seemed to her. and yet how
beautiful the thing had looked, how out of place with its surroundings!
suddenly great tears of bitterness fell on the pillow for this lonely
woman, so utterly without the pale of human sympathy, and yet so
uncomplaining. how beautiful she was! once during the fitting on she had
thrown a piece of satin on her shoulder, too busy for the second to turn
round and put it down. and how its ivory smoothness had matched the
smoothness of her neck and cheek. how well it had contrasted with her
dark eyes and hair. and then there was about her such a nameless grace
and gentle refinement! yet there she had worked in the cold, damp cell,
and been content to work, with apparently no hope for the future, but
moths and mildew and decay.

it was in the midst of these reveries on mariana that rosalie fell
asleep, to wake many times throughout the night, shivering, to think
herself alone within that gloomy room below, tried on for shrouds by
ghosts with horrid grinning laughter.

it was a night in no wise likely to raise rosalie's spirits from the
curious depths of unreality and pain where they had fallen; yet towards
morning she fell into a sleep so deep, that she never awoke from it till
mariana came to call and waken her.

"mariana," she said, "you promised you would show me mr. todbrook's
portrait yesterday, and you never did."

"it is in the picture-gallery. you could have found it for yourself."

"i don't know where the picture-gallery is."

"i had forgotten. if you wait for me in the corridor after breakfast i
will show it to you."

so after breakfast rosalie went out into the passage to wait for her.

the gallery was downstairs in that same wing, facing toward the gardens,
where the conservatory was.

it was a very large gallery, longer than broad, with polished floor, and
seats upholstered in red velvet stood along the walls. the light was
admitted from the roof, but very beautiful electric candelabra hung from
the ceiling, which was all panelled and carved in black oak.

mariana led the way to the portrait of the late owner of the marble
house. there he stood in the correct evening dress for a man of his
position, with one hand leaning on a table and the other by his side. he
was slightly built and scarcely of middle height, with a refined,
delicate, and quiet face, and a look of wistful melancholy in his eyes
that interested and attracted rosalie.

"who painted it?" she asked, after studying it for some time.

"i don't know. there is no name to it. i think myself the master may
have done it. it was painted after death."

"from his corpse?" asked rosalie, in horror.

"oh, no! from memory, i should say."

"does mr. barringcourt paint, then?"

"in his spare time, yes. i think he must have done this. i don't know
who else could. even millionaires are bad to remember when once they've
passed away."

"is it like him?"

"i don't know. but everard says it is almost lifelike."

"who is everard?"

"the man who keeps the door."

"i don't like him at the door. do you?"

mariana looked up with almost startled eyes. "don't like him? i like
everyone."

"i don't like him," persisted rosalie. "he's one of those men who always
does what he is told. if mr. barringcourt told him to wring your neck
round, or mine, he'd do it soon—as soon as wink."

"of course," said mariana, as if that were the acme of perfection.

"well, he has neither heart nor head. now, if mr. barringcourt told me
to wring your neck, i'd tell him to do it himself, i'd had no practice
that way."

mariana looked at her in utter surprise, and then suddenly she sank back
upon the velvet seat, and began to laugh. unhappily, her merriment did
not last, for almost as suddenly she jumped up again, her face white
with pain, and her features drawn and contracted.

"oh, for heaven's sake don't make me laugh! the pain at my heart is
something terrible," and she caught rosalie's arm in her hand, quite
unconscious of the strength of the grip she had taken.

in surprise and alarm, the unconscious offender stood still.

"what is it?" she gasped at length. "is the pain very bad?"

mariana looked at her and nodded.

"talk about one's heart breaking," she said, with a wintry smile. "every
time i laugh i get that feeling."

"let us go away," said rosalie, noticing that the great pallor of her
face did not decrease.

"yes. it's time i was back at—at the wedding garment."

"but you're not going to that damp, dark place this morning, are you?"

"yes."

"then i shall come with you."

"no. i told everard, and he does not approve."

"but he is not master here."

"no; but his advice is very good to go upon."

"did i not tell you how heartless he was?"

"you mistake what is meant for kindness. let us go."

in the central hall she took leave of rosalie, and disappeared inside
the gloomy eastern wing. and rosalie made no further attempt to come
with her, for her horror of the previous night was still fresh in her
mind.

"i don't know how mariana can do it," she thought, standing still in the
great hall. "it's killing her. she looked like death this morning. and
to go there right away, to be buried in that damp sepulchre! it's
terrible, terrible! i _hate_ mr. barringcourt! he's bad—right-down bad!
the worst man i know!"

but then she knew so very few.

she was awakened from this reverie to find everard, the doorkeeper,
coming toward her.

her first impulse was to turn away and walk toward the staircase, which
she did.

"miss paleaf!"

his tone attracted her immediate attention. there was a certain strong
gravity in it that appealed to what gravity and steadiness there was in
her.

"yes," she answered, turning round to view this wringer of necks in
prospective.

"you have endeavoured to do an incredible amount of harm since coming
here. don't you think it would be advisable to practise a little
self-control?"

"yes. i think if it were practicable it would be advisable to shut
myself up in a tin box, or oak, perhaps, and turn round once a week for
recreation."

"you rush from one extreme to the other without any attempt at reason."

"and—and you?"

"for mariana's sake i wish to advise you to be careful."

"not for my own?"

"no. i know nothing about you, and you seem pretty capable of looking
after yourself."

rosalie looked at him, not knowing whether her dislike was growing or
lessening.

"do you know you're taking a great liberty?" she said, her colour rising
despite her efforts to keep cool.

"yes. and under the circumstances it is pardonable."

"what circumstances?"

"you are doing your best to destroy the happiness and peace of a working
woman."

"happiness! happiness! do you call it happiness to be fastened up in
there the greater part of the day-time?" and she pointed to the door
through which mariana had passed a short time before.

"when she is contented it is, at least, the nearest approach to
happiness. and your ignorant meddling can never have a good result."

then rosalie was silent, and with no heart to answer she turned away,
and went upstairs to the little sitting-room.

her own heart ached enough in all conscience. o god! to be free! away
from all this coldness and hardness, and gloom and silence.

she buried her face in her hands and cried from utter dejection. when
she went to wash her hands and face for dinner, she was dismayed at her
own plain looks. she was very far from being ready for a meal, and made
little attempt or pretence at eating what was placed before her. at last
the young man who waited on her presented a red lozenge to her on a
silver plate.

"what is it?" she asked, not being accustomed to this particular dish.

"the nutriment you require to keep you in health. you have eaten
nothing, and this is less troublesome if you have no appetite."

she frowned in indecision, and for one minute looked at him and then at
it. then without another word she ate the contents of her plate, and
afterwards a plate of plain milk pudding.

but when alone again the same weak desire to cry began to gain upon her,
and it was only after a very hard fight she overcame it.

"i don't know how it is," she sighed. "they make you do things here
however much you don't want to. i wonder now if the eating of my dinner
was a lesson in self-control."

then she went back to her bedroom and shut the door, and knelt down by
the bed to pray, if prayer it could be called. despite her efforts,
everything was most incoherent and jumbled, broken by big sobs, and
ending in no prayer at all, but silence. at last the silence must have
brought its effect of soothing, for rosalie rose from her knees with
scarcely a vestige of the past emotion upon her face. she combed her
hair and smoothed her dress, and then went for her hat.

"i'll go into the garden," she said, "and see if i can see the city."

it was a glorious afternoon, with just sufficient sharpness for autumn
in the air. it was considerably after three by the tower clock, and she
recognised with regret there was time for little more than an hour
there. her hopes were realised. from the top of the red bank of flowers
she could view the city very plainly. she saw right across to the
high-standing temple, with every building of note and height rising in
between. behind her she could see nothing, for the wall rose
exceptionally high, but from here she could look in the direction of the
old home, and to that other magnificent erection that contained all the
best prayers and aspirations of her dumb life.

after all, to look on to the sights of freedom is in a measure to the
prisoner freedom itself.

from the city beyond, rosalie's eyes wandered back toward the mansion.
there was something wanting in it; its magnificent outline attracted and
repelled.

"what a lovely fairy story one could write about it," she sighed. "it
seems to me a kind of haunted, sleeping palace; and everything looks so
strong, and dark, and silent, and yet beautiful, that i don't know
whether the story would have to turn out well or ill."

she sat down on the rustic seat with the arbour of trailing leaves
twining above it, and dreamily contemplated the wide expanse of city.

suddenly she heard the ominous striking of the mansion clock.

one! two! three! four! five!

rosalie turned her eyes from the sky and looked at it. a faint pink
flush from the sun was shining on it, and she clasped her hands.

"i won't go in. they can't do anything to me if i don't. five o'clock!
the very nicest time of all the day—the only time to see the city and
the sun look at their best. it isn't wrong of me; i know it isn't. i
haven't done anything wrong that i should be a prisoner. i haven't,
really. i feel i haven't!"

the sunset deepened.

suddenly the great gates leading from the garden flew open to admit a
dog-cart and one chestnut horse driven by mr. barringcourt. behind him
sat a groom, and as they took the sweep of drive leading past her toward
the terrace steps, her eyes fell on the horse and man in livery.

she saw that they did not belong to this place. what was there about
everyone who lived here that made them different from all else? that
groom was just the ordinary groom that one saw every day within the
streets and parks.

as mr. barringcourt passed below he suddenly looked up, and catching
sight of her, took off his hat and smiled. rosalie's heart gave a leap
of excitement.

the flush of evening had dyed her pale cheeks, and given lustre to her
eyes. she watched the light vehicle draw up below the central steps, saw
mr. barringcourt dismount, and the groom lead the horse away by the
shorter carriage drive. rosalie clasped her hands and watched, and made
no sign of moving down.

and the sunset deepened.

for one minute mr. barringcourt stood on the steps looking at his boots,
or maybe on the ground, in apparent thoughtfulness; then he turned round
with sudden decision, and crossed the lawn to the path leading towards
the bank of flowers where she stood. yet no step downward did rosalie
take in that direction, and so he came up the narrow, winding path, and
very shortly reached her.

and how different from all the others he appeared! how full of life and
animation! how strong! how quick at seeing, and therefore understanding!

how weak and lifeless her hand felt in his! and suddenly she felt that
intense admiration for strength which all weak things must have. yet she
searched his face narrowly for that tired and weary look that she had
seen there twice before.

her scrutiny was well returned. out of the purity of a lonely spirit
longing for some companionship her clear eyes had looked full into his,
the ending of a day of weakness and tears and silent waiting. and under
the deep scrutiny of those stronger eyes she had not power to look aside
till every little secret not worth hiding had been read. then having got
rid of all the weakness, rosalie came to the reserve strength.

she drew her hand out of his, and asked suddenly, with an everyday
interest:

"have you any horses of your own, mr. barringcourt, or do you hire them
all?"

"i have my own; but they're too good for everyday work."

"but when do you exercise them?"

"occasionally at midnight i give them a run round. they are black, so
they don't show. nor do they advertise their coming by too much noise."

this time she looked at him with puzzled incredulity.

"what do you mean?"

"what i say. why are you waiting here?"

"to see the sun set."

"it has set."

"i'm waiting for the afterglow."

and as she spoke, the whole sky from east to west flushed to a sudden
lowering crimson. it was reflected on his face, on hers, shone from the
many windows—red—red—a sea of golden red and copper colour, dyeing all
things.

"but you have no business out here after sunset, have you?" he said.

"i don't know. you should be judge of that."

"i'm judge of nothing except the mood i'm in, and to-day i'm not sorry
to find you here; but it's rather a dangerous game to play in a place
where strict discipline is observed. don't you know it?"

"no. i couldn't imagine any punishment worse than being a prisoner."

"could you not? oh, there are many worse. you are a prisoner at large,
you must remember."

"the reason why i stayed out is because i could think of nothing i had
done wrong."

"are you a good judge of your misdoings?"

"i don't know. a tongue makes things so complicated."

he laughed. "what have you been doing since i went away?"

"trying to be contented, and help mariana."

"help mariana?"

"yes. i tried on a dress for her last night, but the room was so gloomy
i dare not go again this morning."

"what kind of a dress were you trying on?"

"a wedding-dress that gave me the shivers. do you know, mr.
barringcourt, i think mariana the most splendid woman i ever met."

"indeed."

"yes, and i think she's the most shamefully ill-used woman, too."

"no one is ill-used, except dogs and dumb animals in general."

rosalie gave him one of her sidelong penetrating glances.

"well," said she, "there are dumb animals and dumb animals; mariana is
dumb."

"indeed!"

"what i mean is, she never complains."

"very sensible of her. there is no one to listen."

"there is everard! she asks his advice upon everything."

"she told you that?"

"yes. she talks about everything but her own hard life."

"that is why you wish her to speak about it. did she do so, you would
wish her silent. the world is very contrary, rosalie."

he stepped aside to let her pass before him down the narrow path. there
was no alternative but to obey, as the sunset had now completely died
away, and the dusk of night and its accompanying chilliness had wandered
in, bringing a sense of desolation, of misery.

the master did not lead the way to the side door, but approached the
central one. he let himself in by touching some spring acting in the
toad's head, and rosalie followed with a creepy sense of awe as she
passed between these high doors, with their magnificent workmanship all
hidden in the dusk.

the darkness of the big conservatory was partly dispelled by tiny
electric lights, coloured crimson, that glimmered here and there among
the foliage like glow-worms in a forest. as they passed the
picture-gallery, mr. barringcourt noticed that the door was open.

"who has been in there?" he asked.

"mariana and i went this morning to see mr. todbrook's portrait. who
painted it?"

"i did—from memory. a man's best friend should represent him most
faithfully. don't you think so?"

"but had you nothing to work from?"

"oh, no! nothing but memory. memory is a very wonderful thing if one
only cultivates it."

"if i died, do you think you could paint me?" asked rosalie, turning her
face up to his.

"no," he answered. "i have not known you quite long enough. i could
attempt nothing better than a caricature at present."

she laughed, and said: "i must endeavour to live a little longer, then."

chapter xiii
the folly of simplicity

together they entered the central hall, and saw mariana standing waiting
there. when she saw rosalie she stepped towards her, but on seeing mr.
barringcourt beyond her she stood still.

"what are you waiting for?" he asked.

"for rosalie. it is long past her time for coming in."

"you have wonderful patience to stand here waiting. anyone else would
have gone to look for her."

"if one waits long enough one generally gets what one wants," she
answered, rather irrelevantly.

"well, don't stand there any longer. you're not needed."

"thank you."

she turned away with grace and easy dignity, and walked toward the
staircase; but when there she looked across at rosalie.

"tea is ready."

what a dungeon-knell there was in those three words! tea in that little
shabby sitting-room, away from everything of light, or life, or
understanding. a piece of bread, a cup of tea and whatever else was
going, eaten alone, and the dreariness of a long dull evening beyond.
and somehow or other the thought of the evening frightened rosalie. it
was so dark. the long passages above so ghostly, dim, and silent. and
below? she shivered and looked towards the door of the eastern wing,
that in some unaccountable way seemed to pervade all things with its
shadow and odour of graves.

so though mariana, after she had spoken, stood still and waited a while
for the effect of her words, rosalie delayed to follow her.

the freedom and grandeur of the sunset was still running in her veins;
the pleasantness of conversation and companionship had its influence on
her also.

"ought i to go?" she asked suddenly, looking up at mr. barringcourt.

"i don't know, i'm sure. if you admire mariana as much as you profess i
think you should go."

"it isn't a case of mariana. it's me—myself."

"well, what of you?"

"i'd much rather stay, and have my tea with—with you."

"i don't indulge in tea."

"then do they insist on your eating a red lozenge instead?"

"oh, no! they recognise that i am quite able to look after myself."

"everard told me i was capable of doing that. and yet at dinner-time
to-day i was presented with a red lozenge on a silver salver to take the
place of ordinary food."

"and you accepted it?"

"no, i didn't. but if you don't have tea, i'd better leave you."

"i'll waive a point to-night. i have had so pleasant a holiday that it
is somewhat distasteful to settle down again. go and remove your hat,
and come down."

but when rosalie essayed to move towards the staircase she found mariana
gone, and suddenly she stood still.

"why do you stop?" he asked.

"oh, i'm frightened! i really am! i dare not go about this place at
night by myself. i don't know how it is, but i dare not."

"nothing will hurt you."

"it's the shadows and the darkness—and the silence."

"run along. it's your imagination."

"are you sure there's nothing to be frightened of?"

"nothing!"

so rosalie went, and returned like the wind. her eyes shone with fear,
and her breath came in quick pants.

"what did you see?" he asked, laughing.

"nothing! i did not stay long enough."

so then, in the comfortable cheerfulness of mr. barringcourt's study,
they had tea.

rosalie sat in the big arm-chair by the fire; he in his customary one
drawn from the table. very proud she felt to pour out tea, and quite
forgave the youth who waited on them for his officious behaviour of the
morning. besides, this was such delicious tea. it was not a bit like
that which she had upstairs. the china was superb, with far richer
colours than crown derby, or anything at all resembling it upon the
planet lucifram.

no wonder that, in the midst of all this luxury and comfort, with a
glorious fire and sufficient light, she heaved an unconscious sigh of
great contentment.

"still discontented?" asked mr. barringcourt, breaking the heavenly
silence.

"oh, no! just the opposite. i sighed because i was so happy."

"have you any book on etiquette?" he continued, casting an eye round his
own well-filled book-shelves thoughtfully.

"etiquette? what is that?"

"good behaviour, i think, but i'm not sure."

"no, i haven't any book on etiquette; but i remember what my aunt taught
me."

"well, what did she tell you?" he asked, leaning his head against the
chair-back, and looking across at her out of half-closed eyes.

"she told me always to be polite to people, and unselfish. you see,
there wasn't much else she could tell, because i couldn't talk."

"to be polite and unselfish! umph! that's good behaviour, is it? i think
i've explained etiquette wrongly to you, then." after a silence he
continued: "i believe etiquette has to do with correct behaviour. do you
know anything about that?"

"oh! i expect that is being stiff. no, i don't know anything about that.
we weren't at all stiff at home. you see, there was no need to be. we
had no servants nor anything, and we always said what we thought. at
least, uncle and aunt did, and i listened. but why are you asking about
it?"

"i'm very undecided in my mind about you."

"yes. i get very undecided about myself sometimes. i don't think aunt
would approve of me altogether now."

"in what way?"

"my tongue. it is so sharp, you know. you said it was."

"oh! i'm not thinking about your tongue. i am trying to settle whether
we are breaking the laws of etiquette in thus drinking tea together."

"oh, no! the curates always do it, and they are more correct than
anybody. they like you to offer them tea. aunt used to say so."

"then we are just as we should be?"

"yes. does lady flamington never come to have tea with you?"

"no; i generally go there."

"well, it's just the same."

"who told you of lady flamington?"

"mariana. mariana does not give you a very good character, you know?"

"and is your strength of mind great enough to withstand her libels?"

"well, yes. i like to form my own opinions. besides, the best fun is,
mariana does not understand she's saying anything against you. she tells
me all kinds of things, taking you quite for granted."

"when do you find time for these interesting conversations?"

"at night—and sometimes in the early morning. she never neglects her
work to gossip. but when she talks it's always to the point."

"rosalie, if you wish to possess any fascination, which is another word
for beauty, you must learn to keep all your thoughts, opinions, and
feelings to yourself. it is not conducive to interest to be told of a
person's state too freely. one must be left to find it for oneself."

"do you find me uninteresting?"

"very much so. i do not know another man of my acquaintance on lucifram
who would tolerate your company for half an hour."

her eyes travelled to his with a very real and living pain in them.

"i don't know anything about men except that they're very clever. but
i'd be quite content to earn the good graces of the women."

"why either?"

"oh, because one must be friendly somewhere. it would be awful to have
no friends at all, men or women."

"how many friends would you need for happiness?"

"as many as i could get. you see, when you're poor you can't expect to
have many."

"and when you're rich you have less."

"no, indeed. i'm sure you have heaps of friends, mr. barringcourt."

he laughed in a harsh, dry sort of way.

"you flatter me. in reality, i have no more friends than you."

"but lady flamington?—why, mariana says she is in love with you."

mr. barringcourt bit his lip; but the smile debarred access there
travelled to his eyes.

"well, what if she is in love with me, as you call it. that makes her
one of my worst enemies."

"oh, no! to love anybody is to be their best and biggest friend."

"i grant if the love be disinterested; but then, how often is it so?"

"what does disinterested mean?"

"i don't know, i'm sure," he answered impatiently; "you must look it out
in a dictionary."

"i'm sorry," rosalie answered meekly, "but i thought disinterested meant
unselfish—and i can't understand love being anything else."

"can't you? then you have much to learn. why do you love the serpent?"

the question came with unexpected rapidity.

"i don't. i—i—i—" another pause upon the thrice repeated unlucky
vowel—and rosalie shivered from head to foot quite coldly.

"is this an attempt at fascination?"

the tone was so cold and cruel, and the words carried so sharp a sting,
that they cut rosalie's heart like some whip might have done.

she shook her head.

"i don't understand the serpent," she said, rubbing her hands against
the chair arm. "how, then, can i love it?"

"that implies that you _do_ understand the serpent, and therefore you
are not disposed to love him."

"you aspire to understand me better than i understand myself."

"oh, no! i take you at your own word. i asked you did you love the
serpent, and you said, ‘i don't.' surely there was not much to
understand in that."

"don't let us quarrel," pleaded rosalie.

"quarrel? quarrel? oh, no, certainly not. i had no intention of
quarrelling with you. i remember your telling me the other day you had
no particular affection for the god of lucifram."

"but do _you_ love the serpent?"

"oh! i—i—i—"

"that is unkind of you, and not polite."

"we ought to have your aunt here to act as chaperon. they say it's
scarcely wise to leave a man and woman to themselves, and now i
recognise it."

but rosalie was not far behind in the argument. from cold shivers she
began to experience a certain amount of heat.

"i don't know about a chaperon," she said. "i thought a chaperon was a
woman who looked after a woman, and i should like to know who looks
after the men? chaperons are silly and stupid, and women, if they were
honest, would say they wanted to have nothing to do with them. besides,
it was you who lost your temper then. i didn't a bit. i haven't yet,
only you annoyed me by the way you spoke."

"i? lost my temper?"

"yes, of course. you know you did. you think i've got a secret, and i
haven't; so if you don't like, you needn't be nice to me any more."

and mr. barringcourt laughed. under that laugh rosalie shrivelled up
like a white butterfly under the breath of ice.

"but i do like," he answered, still laughing. "you must not quote from
mariana. it is too absurd. and so you have no secret. i can scarcely
imagine a woman without one, nor a man."

the merciless mocking eyes were fixed on her, so that she seemed
incapable of moving. there rose within her a terrible weakness, a
longing to lean on him, to be guided by his advice, to speak of all
those doubts that preyed upon her mind, and state the few plain facts
that raised them. again, as before in the garden, she recognised that he
was strong, and she was very, very weak. she looked across at him. there
was little of sympathy on his face—much of contempt and ridicule—and
rosalie, sensitive to both, shrank from it and him.

a very awkward pause followed—to her, at least.

"i think the tea-party is ended," he said, getting up and pushing his
chair back to the table. "it was very enjoyable whilst it lasted, but
there is such a thing as folk outstaying their welcome."

but still she sat still, and made no effort to rise.

"what has made you angry?" she asked.

"i don't know, i'm sure. you say i'm angry, so i must be. you should be
able to discover the cause when you've noticed the effect."

"i can't. but when i stumble or stammer i notice it always puts you
out."

"then don't do it."

"i'll try not. but if i sometimes said the things i thought, they'd
sound so foolish that you'd laugh at them."

"they could not possibly be more foolish than the things you say."

"are all the women of your acquaintance very sensible and clever?"

"more or less so. of course, they have the advantage of education and
upbringing; but still that does not do away with the fact that they
possess many natural gifts."

"it must be very nice to possess natural gifts."

"yes. few women are born without them."

"am i one of the few?"

"so far as i can judge you are. with talent and cleverness, you should
be able to escape from prison."

"but i'm staying here on principle. i never thought of trying to get
away."

"that shows your inherent stupidity, and a surprising lack of spirit.
cannot you find a door of escape?"

rosalie shook her head and sighed.

"no," she answered. "i thought of the chimney once, but that was
absurd."

"can you think of no other door?"

"no. it's no good my trying to get out where every door is either locked
or guarded."

"you have not wit enough to think of one, you mean?"

"perhaps so," she answered, and looked at him with eyes full of a great
and wistful longing to be told.

"well, i'll tell you. there is the door of my heart. any other woman
would have thought of it at once."

she shook her head.

"i've had no practice that way. i shouldn't know how to go about to find
it."

"no? as women go, you are intensely stupid. you possess all the
disadvantages of a school-girl, without any of the attractions of
youth."

"i'm not very old," said rosalie. "i'm only twenty-three."

"there you are again. you can keep nothing to yourself."

"i only told you what my age was."

"well, i've none of the curiosity of a census paper, and women who tell
their ages are a pest."

"but why?"

"because it is either a boast or a lie. both are objectionable. keep
your age to yourself. no one wants to know it, and if they do, let them
find out or guess."

"is that what the clever women do?"

"i don't know. if you become a clever woman at second hand, you will
become an abomination."

"what must i do then?"

"remain stupid."

"then i'll never get away."

"oh, no; as soon as i pointed the way i blocked it. had you discovered
it yourself, it might have been unguarded."

"i don't believe you would have let me through, even if i had found it
out."

"of course not. one never believes that which touches one's vanity."

rosalie sighed. what a contrary mood had suddenly seized him! she got
up, with little of life or spirit in her movements.

"then if you find me so very dull i won't come again. three years seem a
long time, but i have no doubt god will help me to live through them."

he laughed.

"god, being dumb, refuses no one, least of all religious women, they
force themselves upon him so persistently. yes, i shall be glad to be
relieved of your company for a while. and so please confine your
wanderings to the upper storey where you live. and leave the garden to
those who can appreciate its beauty sufficiently to be in by five
o'clock."

rosalie looked at him. pain and fear was on her face.

"live upstairs!"

"yes; live upstairs. and eat red lozenges when your appetite is bad. you
can't die, you know."

she turned toward the door.

"good-night!" he said, drawing an open book toward him on the table, and
sitting down.

"good-night! i see now my fault and punishment in staying out of doors
beyond the time."

for only answer he laughed. as he did so the door closed.

chapter xiv
broken spirits

so full of pain and heaviness was rosalie that all her childish fear had
vanished. she passed up the slippery staircase into the corridor, from
which her own small sitting-room was.

never to go downstairs again for three long weary years! never to be out
of the grey, silent, ghostly shadows of those upper rooms—never to have
human companionship or friendliness! a part of the meaning floated
through her mind, and cast its heavy shroud on all things.

it was still early in the evening, too early for mariana to return from
the work which held her. she sat down in the high-backed chair before
the fire, and listlessly looked into it. the flames burnt low. there was
none of the brightness of the other day in them—no whispered message of
hope.

rosalie's spirit ached more from the cruel heartlessness of the master's
conduct than even from the thought of coming imprisonment. for this was
in the present—that the future. none had ever spoken so to her
before—sharply, no doubt but never with this harsh and cruel coldness.
every feeling in her simple nature seemed outraged and lacerated. once
only she moved uneasily in her chair, as one undergoes some great pain,
and cried, or rather moaned:

"it's unfair—unfair! i haven't done anything that's wrong, and it was
silly and stupid of me to ever think of coming back again."

at last the door opened, and mariana entered with supper. rosalie did
not turn round till they were alone again, and scarcely even then, till
mariana came and stood beside her, and looking down, said:

"rosalie, why did you not come in at five o'clock?"

"don't ask me. i was foolish. there is no other reason."

"is mr. barringcourt's company more agreeable than mine?"

"i thought it was, and have paid the penalty. don't reproach me. i can't
stand it to-night. perhaps to-morrow."

"i don't wish to reproach you. once i thought the same, for an hour or
two, like you. but i got over it as you have done. you will not care for
his company now?"

"no."

"that is well. i suppose you know you are not to go downstairs again?"

"yes. what am i to do, mariana, to pass the time away?"

"i don't know of anything. i wish you had come in by five o'clock. there
are so many interesting things below."

rosalie laughed.

"oh, i didn't come in, so there's an end of it! i'll take supper now and
go to bed."

she sipped the glass of warm milk silently, and then together they went
to bed. how cold it was in the corridor. how ill lit and melancholy it
appeared and rosalie lay awake, with burning tears, which were never
shed, in her eyes.

three years! and mr. barringcourt had said a woman of brains or spirit
would have forestalled them and have escaped.

and then it seemed as if across the silence there came that clear, pure
voice that spoke to her before, after her aunt was dead: "neither brains
nor spirit, but the path directed."

and silence and sleep and comfort fell—night's gentle curtain and soft
pillow for all weary heads.

sunday, monday, tuesday, long or short, according to the circumstance.
each resembled some long and silent eternity of nothingness. here was
nothing to do. mariana said there was nothing, and she knew best.

"bring me a little bit of sewing."

but she shook her head. "i cannot bring it from the workroom."

"then something from above."

"there is nothing. each has her work; for you there is none."

"have you no books?"

"mr. barringcourt has the key to the library. i can ask him for one if
you like."

but rosalie shook her head. "no, thank you."

and how difficult she found meal-times, when she must force down food
against all wish and inclination. sunday and monday it was managed
fairly well, but on the tuesday at dinner-time rosalie recognised the
task was quite beyond her.

"all this tastes of cobwebs and damp soil," she said. "if i must have
one, give me one of those little lozenges you offered me the other day."

it was brought. she took it with a glass of water, then rose from her
seat. when she got to the door she turned round. her pretty eyebrows
were slightly raised, and she laughed.

"that was essence of cobweb, i believe. thank you; i feel better already
for it."

all was lost upon the youth; he bowed gravely, and returned no answer,
and rosalie went away.

up and down! up and down the long dim corridor she walked, with nothing
to do but think or mope, or grow melancholy through despair.

after tea rosalie did not venture out beyond the sitting-room, for the
old fear of the darkness had returned; and moreover, to-night a strange
weariness oppressed her. at last she fell asleep. her head rested on the
table, and she slept there for nearly an hour.

a little after nine came mariana and the supper.

"how is the dress progressing?" asked rosalie.

"it is doing very well."

"how is everard?"

"he is very well."

"have you seen mr. barringcourt to-day?"

"no. he is away till to-morrow."

"have you taken a walk this afternoon?"

"a short one."

"where did you go?"

"my customary round. but you must not ask so many questions."

"but why?"

"because," mariana's voice sank to a whisper, "if we talk much i must
leave you, and sybilla will come. and she never speaks all the week,
except on my one night out, and then in a language i never heard
before."

rosalie's pale face grew paler. suddenly she took mariana's hand and
held it very tight.

"are—are you making fun of me?" she asked.

the other shook her head, and thus abruptly the conversation ended.

at midnight rosalie suddenly awoke, to hear the great clock striking—a
sound which she had never heard before in that room. the ache and
weariness of the evening had entirely vanished. she sat up in bed and
looked round the room, lit by one meagre night-light. all was as usual,
very still; the corners of the room were all shadowy. in another second
rosalie was standing on the floor looking around her in a puzzled sort
of way. understanding came with the swiftness of lightning to her brain.
she stood alert, listening, listening, but there was no sound. quickly
and silently she dressed, holding her breath, fearful of being found
thus dressing in the middle of the sleeping night. then with courage
screwed to desperation she went toward the door.

"if i'm found out, god only knows what will happen," she thought and
turned the handle.

it had one advantage with all the rest of that big house: it was silent.

mercifully, a few straggling moonbeams lit up the room, shining from
door to door, leaving the rest in obscurity. without glancing toward the
shadowy bed, she crossed to the outer door, opened it, and stood in the
corridor. the fears born of reality and action had quite killed those of
imagination. she no longer started at shadows, nor trembled at the
darkness, but went on quickly till she reached the stairhead. her shoes
she carried in her hand to prevent sound. she feared the slippery
staircase, lest she should stumble and waken some light sleeper. but
to-night it seemed scarcely so slippery as before. perhaps it was the
descent in her unshod feet. at last she stood safely at the bottom in
the large hall, with its spartan plainness and great richness. chairs,
each worth some small fortune, statues in bronze and marble, and above
all the great, oppressive shadow, emanating from that eastern door of
glass, polished like diamonds, all met her fearful glance.

"if—if i fail—if i'm caught, that's where i go—"

the thought flashed like lightning through her mind, and she looked
round breathlessly to find a doorway.

that leading to the conservatory—it stood wide open. on! on! along the
corridor, dark but for one dim electric light, such as was also shining
in the hall. then through the palm-house, and toward the central doors.
a red spot gleamed upon the centre—the toad's head—for this door was
carved alike inside and out. instinctively she touched the shining knob.
the door flew open. the cold damp air of night wafted toward her as she
stood thus upon the threshold of the garden. then, closing the door
behind her, she moved forward to the steps. and here again rosalie
returned thanks to that light upon the ugly head. for whereas within it
showed her where to touch the spring, here it shone with a direct
brilliancy that lit up the entire straight path across the garden, right
across and through the wooded shrubbery at the farther end, that led
toward the stables. for though the faint light of night might have been
strong enough to guide her to the avenue of trees, nothing could ever
penetrate this heavy gloom, save only a light such as this steady red
one, that lit up the whole long path, right to the stables, as clear
toward the end as at the beginning. so without trouble she came to the
doorless building. one gigantic slab of marble, between two pillars, was
slid back into the wall, and the red light penetrated in beyond. she
followed on the path it lit for her, and stood within a sumptuous
building. it was certainly a stable, though at the moment it was empty.

here she looked round, not from curiosity, but to find some means of
exit. she walked round many times, but found nothing but one small door,
more like a cupboard than a door, built low in the wall, and quite
beyond her power to open.

she wrung her hands in despair, and a terrible sweat broke out all over
her. no way of escape! up to now all things had been so easy, as if
aiding and abetting her in this wild dream and dash for freedom.

suddenly upon the still and ghostly midnight air came a sound: the
rhythmic trampling of horses, and then a neigh half-echoed by another,
as the sound came nearer.

"god help me!" she said, and leant against the carved partition of two
stalls, with that deathlike sweat and fear robbing her limbs of any
strength of motion.

"the key! the key!"

what voice was it that rang so clearly on the night?

she fumbled in her pocket, and found the old disused one of her uncle's
safe.

with nothing but desperation for a guidance she applied it to the little
door, close-built to the ground. it fitted and turned. the door flew
open. as it did so, from the garden came the crunching sound of horses'
feet on gravel, and of wheels.

the little door closed again. rosalie was without the precincts of
marble house, and breathed her first long sigh of freedom.

chapter xv
a wayside house and gloomy cell

but what and where was this place that she had come to? instead of
coming out upon a mews or narrower street of that big city on the planet
lucifram, she stood upon the borders of a wood. foxgloves, cowslips, and
pale wood anemones bordered its shaded paths. she passed onward,
conscious of a new sweetness in the air, and a certain subdued light
which, though faint, was quite devoid of shadows.

and oh! to tread upon a path of velvet—velvet of nature's making, all
soft and soothing to the foot.

and though the beauties of the forest awed, they did not trouble her,
for their shade was instinct with the mood that she was in—a mood which
had much of quiet thankfulness, but no elation. with little feeling of
fatigue she walked along the pleasant path, coming out at last upon a
city all deserted. its buildings were the most majestic she had ever
seen. there was no ordinary streets of houses all in a row. the
buildings had the strength and beauty of past ages. with courtyards of
green, and gates with armorial bearings, the windows of the houses were
narrow. during the ages, here and there a cornice or a step had
crumbled, giving a certain hoary majesty to the houses, showing they had
long withstood the inroads of all-conquering time. no sound of life
enlivened the scene; all was silent as the house which she had left. in
the central square two churches stood, one in a state of erection, one
in the middle stage of being pulled down. truly it was very curious. all
around betokened signs of recent workmanship. but as in dreams one
cannot pause to reason, neither did she.

through the silent empty streets she passed, and came once more on to a
stretch of country which rose in hills not far off. these were steep and
high, as rosalie found on coming nearer to them, but the path bordered
with wild flowers led her to and up them, and when at last she stood
upon the summit of one that rose amongst the highest, she looked down
upon a country of gentle slopes and valleys, and dark stretches of
forest. a broad and glorious river rolled its even course picturesquely,
curving to right and left, here disappearing in the shade of the
woodlands, here glittering in the rising sun. with more heart and
renewed vigour she descended from the hill-top into this pleasant
country beyond it. the path led along the boundaries of a wood, and
suddenly there came in sight a low white house, lying far back within a
wide expanse of garden, banked with wild flowers of nature's growing. on
the sunny side it was unshaded by the forest, and deep-coloured peaches
were glowing in the light. a low verandah ran along the façade, and many
sweet and lovely creepers twined about its slender pillars. the big
front door stood open, also the garden gate. rosalie, with tired feet
and thankful heart, went up to it and knocked.

within was a simply-furnished hall, arranged with simplest taste. bowls
of roses stood upon the tables, and the windows, in the recesses formed
by the window seats, were open, admitting straggling stems of flowers
that clustered upward from below. built in the wall was a golden fluted
organ, the ivory keyboard open, and all the mystic stops clear to the
view.

rosalie knocked.

a door at the farther end of the house opened, and a youth appeared,
coming toward her. he was so handsome, and walked with such grace and
youthful brightness, that rosalie's heart went out toward him on the
instant. he did not wait for any word of explanation, but said:

"my father will be very pleased to see you. we have been expecting your
arrival for almost a week."

"but where did i come from?" asked rosalie, as taken with his gentle way
of speaking as his appearance.

he laughed.

"i don't know; but from a hot place and a great distance, i should
think, or else your wits would never have been sharpened to take so long
a journey."

"i wonder how old he is?" thought she. "fourteen at the most. he should
have more respect for me than to speak so—so freely; and yet it's nice
to be spoken to quite humanly again."

"yes," she answered; "i've come a very long distance."

"come this way. see my father, and then you may rest."

he took her to a room furnished simply, and not unlike that of mr.
barringcourt's; and there, seated at the table, occupied much as he had
been in studying, writing, and arranging papers, was the father of the
boy.

his hair was very white, as white as silver, and his face was beautiful
and clearly cut. he had an appearance of great age, and his tall figure
was thin and muscular. in some indescribable way he reminded rosalie of
mr. barringcourt. a vague fear began to spring in her mind—for in his
dress and manner there was something strangely reminiscent, even though
he looked so very old, with his lined face and silver hair.

but he used what mr. barringcourt had never used, and that was a pair of
glasses; and his glance was very keen as he looked up at her above them
with bent brows. and whereas mr. barringcourt's eyes were as black as
night, his were of a piercing blue, or some colour very like blue. the
quality that struck rosalie most was their intense brightness.

the youth, having admitted her, withdrew, and closed the door behind
him.

"you are punctual, rosalie, and i'm very pleased to see you."

he rose as he spoke, and drew a chair for her, and on the hearing of his
kind, grave voice much peace and reassurance settled on her.

"i couldn't help myself," she answered. "i had to come. but you can't be
half as pleased to see me as i am to see you!"

he looked at her. "are you then so much in need of a friend?"

"yes; but i think i should make better friends with your son than you."

the vestige of a smile crept into his eyes. "but why?"

"well, i expect you will be too clever. you would soon learn how stupid
i was; and then perhaps we should quarrel."

rosalie looked up shyly as she spoke those last words. the quarrelling,
she felt pretty certain, would be all on his side, as it had been with
mr. barringcourt, for she would never have presumed so far.

"you give billy credit for being more forbearing than i?"

"oh, no; i think he will be less observant. i'm very stupid, you know,"
she continued, with her large, earnest eyes fixed on his; "and people
get very soon tired of me. i thought it might be just as well to tell
you now, in case you might form a wrong impression, and then be annoyed
after, and blame me for it."

"well," said he, smiling, "that will do for the present. sleep to-night,
and in the morning we will hold a longer conversation."

"but it's morning now."

"oh, no! it's evening coming on. the sun has set. no travellers ever
come to us with morning. the journey is too long for that."

"but everybody cannot come to you just at the same time."

"well, pretty much at the same time. we live in the centre of a circle,
and the distance from every direction is fairly equal."

"do you get many travellers?"

"not compared with many wayside inns. but we have a select few that are
always very welcome, for we know that they possess some merit, or they
would never reach us."

"ah! then i am afraid i am not equal to the rest. i have no merits.
nothing but chance and god's goodness brought me to you."

he smiled. "that is curious coupling," he answered. "chance and god's
goodness."

"well, it was so extremely strange and unexpected."

"we will speak more about it to-morrow. but now i will come with you to
see what light refreshment our house affords."

he rose from his chair and led the way into another room where lamps
were lit, though there was still much light outside, and a clear fire
burning.

"how stupid of me not to notice the sun was setting. i thought when
first i saw it it was rising."

"that is a common mistake, much commoner than you'd think, with those
coming from lucifram. you see, it is the direct turnabout, and it is apt
to muddle one at first."

"yes, indeed. what lovely flowers!"

rosalie was looking at the pretty supper-table and its exquisite
decorations. there was something so pure and delicate and delicious
about everything, from the snowy linen and flowers all white and flaxen
coloured, to the china and vessels of silver and crystal glass.
moreover, there was no shadow lying here. one might eat in happiness and
sweet contentment, and the thankfulness born of these.

and moreover, she did not sit down alone. her host took his place at the
head of the small square table, she to the side of him. every dish was
ready served. but first he offered her a little glass of purest
sparkling water. rosalie drank it. the intense fatigue had vanished
almost on the instant. she made no effort to talk much, for he said
nothing, but ate her supper in silence. then at last he rose.

"i will show you to your room," he said. "billy has gone home; he only
stayed to welcome you."

"i thought he was your son?"

"so he is. but this is not my home. it is but a temporary lodging,
conveniently situated for business purposes."

"does no one else live here?"

"no one. you need not be afraid. i am sufficient protection."

she followed him with trust and all simplicity to the bedroom set for
strangers. when she was alone, by the light of two soft lights hanging
from the ceiling, she compared the pure white hangings with the crimson
silks at marble house. here, indeed, was light-heartedness and freedom
from all depression; and with her head once on the pillow, she slept the
first genuine sleep of happiness for many a day.

*       *       *       *       *

marble house lay swathed in the mist of early morning. the sun had not
yet risen, only that just perceptible twilight that makes known the
distant approach of day was at hand. but one by one various lights made
their appearance in several of the upper rooms. the occupants were
rising at their accustomed hour. it was close on six.

mariana also awoke, and with the first return of consciousness came the
consciousness of loss, vague and alarming. when the light was turned on
she noticed the door leading to rosalie's room wide open, and her own
upon the passage standing closed but for the catching of the clasp.
hurriedly she passed into the inner room, to find, almost as she
anticipated, the bed unoccupied, its inmate gone. she went to the
dressing-room beyond. it also was empty. then turning back to her own
room, she dressed with a curious silent haste. a dull, murky grey sky
showed through the window. it caught mariana's eye and intruded itself
upon her memory. then when her toilette was completed she went out into
the corridor. there was no sign of rosalie either in the little
sitting-room or dining-room, and the truth forced itself undeniably upon
her. rosalie had gone—escaped in the night. but where? on second
thoughts it seemed impossible. who ever yet escaped from marble house in
greensward avenue upon the planet lucifram? she smiled forlornly to
think of such a thing. and then a sudden fear and trembling for the
unhappy girl came over her.

she had tried to escape and had been detected—must have been detected.
there were many cells in the east wing, and to attempt to escape and
fail in it was of all crimes most criminal.

a feeling, or the memory of a feeling, surged in her heart, so cold, and
even, and restricted. like some quick-gliding spirit she sought the
staircase and descended, finding everard arranging a large batch of
papers on the table in the hall. he looked up at her approach, and
seeing the slight alteration in her features and expression, said to
himself, "it's wednesday," and went on with his work. but the
earnestness of her voice attracted him.

"everard!" there was more in it than her usual simple, even tone.

he looked up again.

"everard! where is rosalie? where have you put her?"

"rosalie? i have not seen. is she not upstairs?"

she shook her head.

"is she in there? you have not put her in there?" and pointed to the
right-hand door.

he shook his head impatiently.

"she is nowhere of my putting or knowing. she should be upstairs yet.
eight o'clock is her hour for getting up."

"she is not there."

"not there?" he put the papers he held in his hand down, and looked at
her.

"no. and nowhere else upon the corridor."

"have you searched well?"

"yes. i did not like to wake the others. do you think she can possibly
have got away?"

"impossible! the doors are barred—and double locked—and spring-locked."

"i know. but where is she."

"there must be a search instituted."

"thank god the master is away."

"he came home last night at midnight."

his voice was grim as his information was short.

"come home! come home!" repeated mariana. "what shall i do?"

"you had best go and tell him."

"is he up?"

"yes. an hour ago."

"i can't go. do this thing for me, everard. i never asked you anything
before."

he looked at her with a face half serious, half cold, then turned in the
direction of the west wing.

mariana sat down on one of the many chairs—a solitary figure in that big
empty hall, with clasped hands and shrinking form, fearing vaguely.

everard knocked at mr. barringcourt's door, and obeyed the summons to go
in. before everard could speak the master looked up, and said, with a
pleasantness not always customary in him:

"good morning, everard! when rosalie paleaf has had breakfast, i want
you to see her. don't forget to tell mariana. what is it?"

"she has disappeared in the night!"

"who?" and the dark brows contracted slightly as he looked across at the
speaker.

"rosalie paleaf."

"disappeared in the night? tell fairy stories to those that believe
them."

"she is not in her bedroom, nor the corridor to which she was
restricted."

"who has told you this?" said the master, getting up.

"mariana."

"confound mariana! go and search house and gardens, and take the
search-light, and bring her back in half an hour."

everard withdrew.

"disappeared!" said mr. barringcourt, left to himself, and his brows
came together blackly. "that is impossible, without the help of
mariana," and then he turned to the letter he was writing and finished
it, though it was a long one, before everard returned.

on his entrance the master looked up.

"she is nowhere."

"you have searched in every place, likely and unlikely?"

"in every place."

then a very cruel light leapt into his eyes, in that deep shadow that
encircled them, and his lips closed one over the other grimly, as he
looked across at the doorkeeper.

"who is to thank for this?"

"it was a circumstance quite unforeseen."

"i don't doubt it. where is that heavy-sleeping ass, whose snores
swallow up footfalls and opening doors?"

"you mean—"

"i mean your first cousin for dulness of perception. send me that
brainless thing called mariana."

everard withdrew. he walked along the corridor as evenly as usual.
whether doubt or misgiving was in his mind, it showed nothing in his
face.

there, in the outer hall, scarcely having moved during the whole time,
sat mariana. on the opening of the door she looked up.

"the master wishes to speak to you."

"is he very angry?"

"nothing but what may be appeased. but you had better say no more than
you can help."

she got up without a word, and went to the study.

"where is the girl i entrusted to you?" he said, as soon as the door was
closed.

"she has escaped during the night."

"at what time?"

"between ten and six."

"the time is vague. you're a sound sleeper to be able to count eight
hours of unconsciousness."

"i merit it by hard work during the day."

"oh! you should have explained this a little earlier. if your work was
too hard, others could have been set to watch. your excuse is
admirable."

"it is no excuse, it is the truth."

"you never heard a footfall, nor a door creak?"

"no. the doors, as you know, have never creaked."

"i know nothing. you will perhaps enlighten me, and not take too much
for granted."

"i can say nothing but in answer to your questions."

"and you know nothing of the hour of escape?"

"i know only that i saw her safely into bed last night, looking utterly
tired out. she fell asleep almost before i left the room. this morning i
found the door leading from my room into hers standing open, and that
leading to the corridor off the latch."

"has she left anything behind her?"

"i found her hat and cloak in the wardrobe; i do not think she can have
taken them."

"your deduction is beyond argument. a little less sleep would stir that
muddled, dreamy brain of yours into some semblance, at least, of
action."

"i don't think it's the sleep that makes me stupid. it's the dull
greyness of the sky."

"maybe. what penalty are you inclined to pay for your neglect and lack
of vigilance?"

"it was not neglect. i slept heavier than i have ever slept before. i
believe god helped her, for she was young and good and innocent."

"you seem to entertain no sorrow for your neglect of duty."

her puzzled eyes, tired and questioning, met his.

"no, i do not feel sorry. how can i? she could not settle to this prison
life as i have done. she was of a softer and more yielding nature. what
hardens me would soon have killed her altogether."

"better be killed than get away alive without permission. and you, being
the offender, must bear her punishment beside your own."

a wintry smile crept to her lips.

"oh! i am strong enough for any punishment. i have a frame of iron
buried in what seems like flesh. if i have sinned, then name the
punishment. but sin at times, if sin this be, brings near an echo of
happier things beyond this life to conjure."

"you are too hard-worked, you say."

"i said i slept the sounder for it."

"sound sleeping is a thing for swine. you shall not work so hard, for
you must sleep less heavily. you are intent upon a wedding-gown, i hear.
leave it unfinished."

"but i have worked at it three years; the dullest work is finished. this
is the part i love, that makes some compensation for that other thing i
worship."

"and for the double punishment, seeing your working hours have been
reduced and cancelled, there will be no further need for that night
out—excruciating torment for the all unhappy listeners."

"rosalie loved my playing." her dark eyes shone out from a face pale as
death.

"no. she was bribing you to stop by flattery. did she not counsel you to
give it up?"

"ah! that is impossible. i ask nothing but two little hours a week. if
that goes, i might as well be dead."

"you might then, for you have done with them."

"it was the stipulation when i came here."

"you have broken the stipulation by your carelessness."

"what am i to do, then?"

"nothing. learn to appreciate the luxury of idleness."

"you have not weighed the fairness of such a punishment."

"you have angered me."

"give me but one hour a week, then. give me but one."

"no, not one! get away out of my sight, lest i be tempted to kick you
out."

"where must i go? i have no place amongst the others now."

"there is the workroom. you had best guard what you have made from
moths. that is sufficient occupation surely for one who hitherto was too
hard-worked."

"it is a return to the life i led before i came here."

"the information does not interest me. you live your life according to
your own making. go; i have no more to say to you."

mariana's eyes glittered.

"i would i could appeal to some power without against this cruel
sentence."

"oh! there is no power without. the world is too busy with its own
affairs. you had best sink into silence gracefully. you have got past
the age of screaming and past the age of tears. you have let go the only
prisoner i set my mind on keeping, and need expect no mercy for it.
imbecile! go!"

the words were accompanied by an action so indicative of savage
irritation that mariana, without further reply, turned to the door and
left the room.

daylight, unaccompanied by much warmth, had taken the place of twilight.
the lights were out, and morning had begun.

along the corridor into the central hall, with face all deathly white,
she passed. she met everard there. he had waited for her.

he read her untold story by her face, for she never said a word, and
glided past him like a ghost in a painted picture toward the eastern
wing.

the door swung open. here no light had ever penetrated by night or day,
save only the artificial glimmer and pale ghastliness.

then at no. 13 she stopped, and opened the low-built door. she gave one
hurried glance back to the big double door that shut her off from life,
then passed into the damp, dark cell, and closed the door behind her.

no longer the work that filled with a certain pleasure the long hours of
day. to sit there idle, without light, or companionship, or
occupation—that was her doom now. and then, to give up that precious
pleasure and intoxicating dream that came round once a week! she
shuddered at the black thought.

down she sat upon one wooden chair. and as she sat, the moths descended
one by one about her. but when she sighed they flew far off again. the
moths in flimsy clouds hovered above, and knew quite all too well their
time had not come yet.

so there for the present we must leave her—stiff, rigid, and unmoving.
crushed down by pain and heaviness so great, she had no strength to move
or cry.

chapter xvi
the governor

the morning came, and rosalie awoke, light-hearted and ready to arise.
no one came here to call her except the sun and singing birds outside
the window. none else were needed. when she had dressed, she passed out
on the landing and down the staircase, and seeing the door open to the
dining-room where she had supped last night, went there. its open
windows opened on the ground. breakfast was laid for two, and as none
else was visible she passed out into the garden, eagerly drinking in the
wondrous freshness of the morning air.

at last she saw the stranger of the night coming toward her from a gate
in a high yew edge that separated the garden from whatever lay beyond.
he carried a basket in his hand, and as he came nearer rosalie saw that
the basket contained small seeds. though he wore glasses when writing in
the house, he evidently did not need them here. in fact, it did not seem
to her that a man with eyes so blue and piercing could ever be
short-sighted at all, but still it must be so. he wore no hat. the sun
shone on his silver hair, a brilliant lustre. he walked with ease and
gracefulness, and again the odd resemblance in appearance to mr.
barringcourt recurred to her.

"good morning, rosalie! i think a spray of flowers would greatly improve
that sombre dress of yours. gather what kind you like, and come to
breakfast—it is waiting for us."

he passed on as he spoke, and disappeared within the house.

following his advice, she gathered a cluster of pale roses, and placed
them in her belt. truly, his words, though simple, had had a very good
effect. she no longer felt she wore a uniform of black and red. the
flowers had given the happiest relief.

after breakfast he invited her to his study, "for," said he, "i wish to
have some conversation with you before eight o'clock. after that i am
engaged till twelve, and rarely find much spare time till evening has
closed, and to-night i cannot spare you even that."

when they were both seated there, he began the conversation by saying:

"last night you told me you knew of no merit that could have brought you
to me, but i think that, between us, we must endeavour to discover one.
perhaps, if you will repeat your story to me, i may be of use in finding
it."

so on that rosalie recounted the story of her early life, simply and
truthfully, up to that last visit to the temple. nor did she omit her
meeting with mr. barringcourt there, and the short conversation she had
held with him. but on mentioning the last visit, after her aunt's death,
she came to a sudden stop, and seemed undecided and unknowing how to
proceed.

"you say you went once more inside the sacred curtain. but why?"

"i felt i had given up so much that the serpent must recognise how much
i really loved him. besides, i felt i wanted to get some real strength
to go on living after every hope and aspiration had died away."

"what was it made you wish so badly for a tongue?"

"i don't know. i don't think it was me that wished; i think it was
something else."

and then she flushed, for that was the style of speech mr. barringcourt
would have ridiculed. and she herself recognised that truth at times, to
the ignorant or wilfully blind, may appear silly and foolish. but this
new acquaintance made no remark immediately, only his keen eyes
travelled across her face, as if reading something there.

"and that something?" he asked at length.

"i don't know, i'm sure. but it never gave me any peace, and it wasn't
myself, i am sure. sometimes i used to reason that i couldn't possibly
receive the gift of speech, and yet the inner voice repeated, ‘go on, go
on!' so that, apart from my own great wish, i was obliged to do as i was
told."

"and you received the gift at last?"

"yes."

"on that last visit to the serpent?"

"no, i—i—i—for that i went to mr. barringcourt."

"the serpent did not heal you, then?"

"oh, sir, could it?" rosalie's voice was almost a remonstrance.

"is not the serpent the god of lucifram?"

"yes, and that is what has troubled me so heavily ever since; far more
than imprisonment and harshness."

"what has troubled you?"

"perhaps if i tell you, you will think me fanciful."

he smiled.

"fancies are all put to the test here," he answered, and a certain
sternness rang in the kindness of his tone that reassured rosalie,
somehow or other, when she thought it would have frightened her.

"well, after i had resigned my will, and prayed for strength, i closed
my eyes, and it seemed as if a great vision flashed before me in the
darkness. the serpent seemed to have turned round, and to show that from
the back it was all hollow, and in its three tails, so black and dingy
from the inside, three dwarfed jesters sat, with caps and bells, all
grinning and pointing, as if to make a mock of everything. and then a
fire of purest light and radiance, with a centre of unearthly
brightness, more beautiful than any sight i ever saw, rolled over
everything, and burnt the hollow symbol to a cinder with its
all-conquering strength."

rosalie's eyes were shining as they looked across into his.

"and in my mind the same thing must have happened. for somehow no longer
i thought upon the serpent. all was changed. whatever humble love i had
to give, and strength to ask, were given and claimed by some wise
reasoning being far above, whose faintest breath could shrivel into
cinders this grinning mockery worshipped of man."

"what of the cinder?"

"oh! i remember it never burned away. it shone like a little ball of
gold within the fire, and i wondered at the time why it had never
disappeared."

then suddenly she got up and crossed the room and knelt down beside him,
and clasped her hands upon the arm-chair.

"and i believe it," she said. "i could never think of going back to the
serpent after the higher thing; i loved to see the pure white light
within that glorious fire. it was so peaceful, restful, strong and
light-giving. i hardly think i could have spent the week that followed,
with all its brilliant lights and gloomy blackness, and everything so
fresh and new, had i not had that light so pure and still to think upon.
it was divinest comfort to me even when the blackness tried to quite
obscure it, and set such a terrible gap betwixt me and every living
thing."

"and after this you left the temple and went to mr. barringcourt?"

"yes; there was nothing more to stay for. and i think the same thing led
me to him that has now led me to you—calling ‘on! on! on!' in spite of
everything."

"and when you got there?"

"then he healed me, by a very natural process it seemed, that had little
of the miracle about it. but i felt no pain, and i remember he was very
much surprised at it."

"and the cure was perfect?"

"yes, i think it was too perfect. my tongue became most glib and
voluble. words slipped out i often wished unsaid."

"you had had no practice in restraining them?"

"well, no. but i think myself mr. barringcourt really did oil the wheels
of my tongue too freely, because i don't think by nature i should ever
be given to answering back. but when i was there that seemed the one
thing in life i was capable of."

she had risen from her knees and walked towards the fireplace.

"but what reason should he have for doing so?"

rosalie looked at him sideways. then suddenly she laughed.

"you've got to learn some day how intensely stupid and simple i am, so
perhaps you had better know soon as late. well, i think the reason why
he brought my tongue to such a pitch of volubility was because he is
very keen on finding out all secrets, and he thought i should save time
and trouble by being made very talkative."

"he is keen on finding out secrets?"

"yes; it sounds silly, but it's true. he was most peculiar. if other men
are like him, i pity the women that have to deal with them, and often
think how fortunate my aunt was, for uncle was most quiet and
peaceable."

"your experience of people is not very great."

she sighed.

"no; i could not tell whether he was like other men or not. that's how
it was i felt at such a disadvantage all the time. anyway, he wasn't
like any of my relations, the girls and women that i knew, nor even like
the doctor that attended us, nor the bread baker, nor the butcher, nor
any of those. but then everard wasn't. none of them were, in fact."

"what led to your discovery of his _penchant_ for secrets?"

"mariana told me; and when she told me, i laughed to myself, it seemed
so utterly ridiculous. but afterwards i came to understand it. that is
why he quarrelled with me, and left me a prisoner in the upper storey."

"in so short a time?"

"yes. he found i had no secret worth discovering."

"but had you not?"

"no. sometimes i felt tempted to tell him the real facts of my last
visit to the temple, but something always held me back. and after all,
if i had told him i should have become a prisoner all the same."

"maybe. then in the end you quarrelled with him?"

"no, he quarrelled with me. we were getting on, as i considered, very
nicely, and suddenly i could say nothing that would please him.
afterwards i understood it was because he had grown tired of me, and
found me unprofitable, so far as secrets were concerned."

"and so you were consigned to shadows, and a suite of rooms in an upper
storey?"

"yes, and it was terrible. i never wish to go through such a time again.
it seemed to me eternity. even now i don't believe it was a week. it was
a year of weeks."

"did mr. barringcourt ever ask you any questions about the serpent?"

"yes; he often asked me questions."

"and you never told him what you had seen then?"

"no, i couldn't, much as i wanted to. when i got to that part i only
stammered, and that used to make him angry."

"then how can you say he discovered you had no secret worth discovering
when you distinctly had one?"

"he would have simply ridiculed it, and said there was no truth in it.
so what was it worth to him?"

"you used some little reason, then, in the controlling of your tongue?"

"perhaps it was i, but i gave the credit elsewhere."

"now we have to discover the merit that lit the path for you to here."

"will you not put on your glasses? it will be hard to find."

"how long did you say you prayed to the serpent for the gift of speech?"

"over two years; and the prayer was answered in a different way from
what i thought."

"by the way, you spoke a little time ago of mariana. who was she?"

"a kind of waiting-maid at marble house. i do not know what else she
could be called, unless a sewing-maid. but she was beautiful, and
different altogether from any sewing-maid that i had ever seen. and even
in a week i grew to love her, for underneath a cold and smooth exterior
she had the sweetest, kindest disposition of anyone i ever knew."

"did she derive much happiness from living there?"

"none, except two hours every wednesday night. and then she played upon
a violin. i never heard such music, though it was weirdly sad. but mr.
barringcourt blinded my reason to believe there was no harmony in what
she played."

"you do not give him an enviable character."

"that is what i said when mariana told me of him." and suddenly rosalie
shuddered. "how can i give him an enviable character when he was cruel,
hard as marble, and vindictive. he was bad, really bad, and the worst
thing is i knew it all the time, yet had he been agreeable to me, really
agreeable, i would have shut my eyes to everything."

and from a very real feeling of shame, her colour deepened, for rosalie
was not one of those people who are blind to their own shortcomings and
weaknesses.

then suddenly turning to her host, she said, changing the conversation:

"what must i call you? everybody has a name, but yours i never heard."

"well," he answered slowly, "i don't know that for the present i have
any name worth going by. some call me the traveller's friend, some the
physician, some the task master. you may call me what you will for the
present. hereafter we may find a better name."

"well, mr. barringcourt was called the master. suppose i call you the
governor, without any abbreviation to a lesser name."

"why that?"

"because mariana told me i was weak, and weak people want someone very
strict with them, and i should like to have a good understanding, you
know, because i'm very ignorant."

he looked at her.

"well, you will find me strict enough. and for the rest, it's bound to
follow."

then he got up, and took down a large volume from a book-shelf, and
seated once more in his chair, with the book on the table, adjusted his
glasses, and opening the leaves, turned them slowly, as one looking
through the pages of a dictionary to discover something.

as last he found the place he needed, and for some time read in silence;
then closed the book and instantly removed his glasses as he looked
across at her.

"i've been through the list of merits, rosalie, and have decided yours
is the questionable merit of clinging on. none others have had much time
to develop yet. they may be there, no doubt, but have not, as it were,
yet come of age."

"clinging on! it's very questionable, isn't it?"

"yes; but you'll have one or two stiff examinations to pass in it before
you've finished."

"but—but the people who cling on are—are so insufferable." and it must
be acknowledged a very real tear of disappointment stood in her eye.

"would you have liked some higher-sounding virtue?"

"yes; i thought you were going to say meekness and gentleness, or some
of the great gifts of the spirit. i never read that ‘clinging on' was
counted much in the book of divine inspiration. besides, who have i been
clinging on to? i deserted the serpent just—"

"just at the right time. there is where the virtue comes. had you been
any earlier you would have shown great fickleness. besides, after all, i
don't think you're very heavy, rosalie. you would not be such an
insufferable load to drag along."

"i don't know, i'm sure. but anyway, i'll trust to you."

"well now, whilst you stay with me there is much work to be done. but
for to-day, until you become accustomed to your new surroundings, you
may take holiday. to-morrow morning be up as early as to-day. after
breakfast i will show you in what direction your work will lie."

after that she went away, and saw no more of him all day. it was an
ideal holiday in the sun and warmth and beauty of the outdoor life. and
for the noontide meal, billy came and sat with her, though he only drank
one glass of water whilst she ate.

"are you not hungry?" she asked.

"well, yes. i'm getting hungry, but it isn't my meal-time yet. you'd be
astonished if you saw the amount i eat compared with you," and he
laughed in the gayest, happiest tone. after a while he said: "have you
made friends with the frog yet?"

"with whom?"

"the frog. my father's pet frog. it is in the garden, but is rather shy
of strangers, but very talkative when once you get to know it."

"a frog? and it can talk?"

"you bet! it has a better fund of words and style of oratory than many a
statesman."

"well, then, it should be a human being."

billy looked at her, and his brilliant sparkling eyes were laughing.

"well, no, hardly that. it is quite contented to remain a frog—a very
superior kind of frog."

"do you come every day for lessons?" asked rosalie, uncertain what to
say.

"three times a week. and the other days i walk over in my spare time."

"then you have not far to come?"

"not far, comparatively speaking. the distance lessens as one grows
older, i find."

"then it would be less to me than you?"

again he laughed.

"well, no; i expect i've had more practice than you. good morning!"

and he was gone, leaving rosalie to ponder on that odd kind of powerful
beauty in his face, and that exuberant merriness that made her sigh to
lose him. for that was the worst of billy. he seemed to come and go more
like some brilliant spirit, a kind of mercury, with winged heels, to
bring one ray of sunshine, and then depart.

chapter xvii
a plantation

the next morning after breakfast the governor led her down the garden to
the gate in the edge of yew. he carried in his hand the basket she had
seen the day before, containing seeds. but whereas yesterday they had
looked green, to-day they had a silvery-white appearance, toning to a
liquid aspect as of water in the centre. beyond the edge stretched a
square plot of uncultivated land bordered by willow trees, and at the
further side a little hut of wood, just in the shelter of the forest.
but here the sun did not shine so brightly. the garden of pleasure was
left behind. this was the field of _work_.

the governor led the way across to the hut. it consisted of two rooms, a
living- and a sleeping-room, and moreover a little cellar, where she
discovered all kinds of garden implements and spades, and one large fork
that looked as if it were for digging heavy soil.

he put the basket down upon the table, and then he said:

"this is your little house. these are the seeds to be sown in the strip
of land you see without. you must dig and sow, and then wait for the
harvest. the books upon the shelves you may study in your leisure, but
you must grasp each subject thoroughly before your time of
apprenticeship is over."

so saying, without any word of advice or caution he left the hut and
crossed to the gate that led to the garden. rosalie was left alone.

but though on one side lay a great and unknown forest, she experienced
no fear at being left alone, even though when she looked out she noticed
how uncompromisingly high the edge appeared, shutting her quite away
from sight or sound of the pretty wayside house.

but just then a voice attracted her attention.

"well! well!" said it, most harshly, "what's the first thing that a
farmer does before he sows his seed?"

"i don't know, i'm sure," answered rosalie; "i've never lived in the
country," and looked round to find the speaker.

and there on the doorstep was a frog sitting, looking up at her half
contemplatively, half pityingly. its colours were beautifully striped,
green and white. on its head these colours blended brilliantly, taking
away some of the staring effect of the wide-open eyes.

"don't know?" it answered. "well! well! you'll have to dig. get a fork
and dig. well! well! best to know nothing than to know too much."

rosalie went as she was told, and brought the big fork she had noticed.
it certainly was very big, and looked aggressive.

"do you mean this?" she asked.

"what else should i mean? now then, set to work. the quicker you begin,
the quicker you'll finish."

"but—but what must i do with it?"

"grasp it in both hands. stick it in the ground, and push it in with
your foot. well! well! the sooner you learn, the sooner you'll know."

"i won't!" said rosalie. "it's a man's work; why, it's digging. i know i
was never intended to do that."

the frog, by way of showing its disgust, gave a contemptuous croak.

"man's work? it isn't the work most men would thank you for giving them.
even as far back as the days of divine inspiration mankind was ashamed
of it. it's woman's work! what man won't do always falls to the woman."

"but women never dig in our country," said rosalie, still bent on the
argument.

"what country's yours?"

"the biggest in the whole of lucifram."

"it would be bigger still if the women applied themselves better," said
the frog, and a short silence followed.

"do you really think i ought to do it?" said rosalie, at last, not being
of that stubborn nature that delights in saying "no" and sticking to it.

"well, i don't see what else is to be done," said her companion. "if you
don't dig you'll never sow, and if you don't sow, you'll never reap, and
if you don't reap you'll never—"

"never what?"

"prove you're anything but a fool."

"really?" said rosalie.

"really!" said the frog; but the expression in each voice was different.

so she stuck the fork into the ground, and found it took a great deal of
strength to make any impression upon the surface. but once having put
her shoulder to the plough, as it were, there was nothing for it but to
go on, for the old voice kept ringing "go on! go on!" and consequently
on she went.

the frog, for some considerable period, watched her from the side, but
finally hopped away into the hut. at noonday it appeared again, and
summoned her to dinner, which was already prepared in the little
living-room.

"who prepared my dinner?" asked rosalie, after she had washed her hands
and settled to the meal.

"i did," it replied. "it's a woman's work certainly, but if you waited
for a woman to do it for you, you'd come badly off. no; i'm a frog, but
when there's no one else by i can do other work besides my own. how do
you like digging?"

"it makes me very tired, and the inside of my hands are quite sore."

"are they? well, you've got to go on again this afternoon, you know. if
you don't get the seeds in before very long they'll wither."

she answered nothing, but after the customary hour of rest returned
again to the hard labour.

it was slow work and very hard, and not a soul came near all the day
long. in fact, during the afternoon even the frog seemed to have
deserted her, and it was not till the first faint tinge of evening
crossed the sky that she again heard the familiar voice calling from the
wooden doorstep:

"time's up now; tea's ready."

rosalie let the fork drop on the ground, and turned round as eagerly as
her tired body would allow.

whilst she ate her tea, this new friend sat upon the hearth.

"i shall be as stiff as a board to-morrow," said rosalie, laying her
tired arms upon the arms of the chair.

"no; my master sent down that little bottle on the mantelpiece for you.
you must take it before you go to bed, and you will be all right in the
morning—so far as stiffness is concerned, anyway. we don't go in for
torture here, but we believe in hard work—very hard work sometimes."

when the meal was finished the frog said:

"now, if you will take this arm-chair by the fireplace, i will remove
the table."

she did so, and was surprised to see that when the frog pulled a small
knob in the wall the whole table, which, however, was not large,
disappeared through an opening partition, and left the room clear.

"if you want to read or study, you must draw that writing-desk nearer,"
continued her instructor.

"i don't want to do anything to-night. i'm so tired, i think i'll go to
bed early."

"that wouldn't be a bad plan, seeing you have only been at work one day,
and find it all so strange. you'll be more accustomed to it to-morrow,
and get more done."

"yes," said rosalie; "i'm all impatience to be finished. it is such
dreary work, and i'm quite inquisitive about the seeds. i wonder whether
they'll grow up roses, or lilies, or nasturtiums, or dahlias, or
hyacinths, or chrysanthemums, or what?"

"don't you know much about seeds?"

"nothing. uncle was very clever that way; but i never cared about
seeds—they looked so very uninteresting; i only cared about the
flowers."

"if i were you," said the frog, "i would rub a little of that liquid out
of the bottle on my hands. if they are blistered and sore it will heal
them very quickly. i've had sore hands myself, so i can sympathise. and
here's a pair of gloves," it continued, drawing a pair from behind the
coal-scuttle. "i made them this afternoon, instead of coming out to keep
you company. i might have made them outside, but i thought it would be a
little surprise for you."

"oh, thank you," said rosalie. "how very thoughtful of you! where did
you learn everything you know?"

"well! well!" said the frog, with quite a sorrowful croak, "i learnt it
in the school where it is most generally taught."

"where was that?"

"in the school of experience and adversity, for the most part."

"don't you think that people can be kind unless they've gone through a
great deal of suffering?" asked rosalie.

"now and again, just now and again, one finds them. but they're few and
far between."

"i think suffering and trouble make people bitter, or else break them up
altogether."

"not if they're made of the right stuff," said the frog. "it's the
needle's eye that rich and poor men alike have to pass through. if you
can't stand sorrow, you can't stand happiness, though you may think you
can."

"but we were made to be happy. the serpent—god rather, meant us to be
so."

"god meant us to be happy eventually," said the frog gently. "but like
all things else worth having, it takes a great deal of fighting for.
contentment and peace are the nearest approach to it one generally gets
the other side of heaven."

"i don't like the word ‘peace.' it reminds me of a fat woman, and a
dinner of suet dumplings."

"you're prejudiced, or else you've mistaken it for lethargy."

"well, is not contentment a state of lethargy?"

"no; when you're most contented, you're least so. the two things
naturally go together, and keep up a constant flow of action that does
away with torpidness."

"how long do you think it will be before my work is finished here?"

"i don't know. it's rather a foolish question to ask. no one knows. it
depends upon what time the seed takes to ripen and the bent of your
mind."

"and in the evenings must i study?"

"it is your only time. but what you want is plenty of hard work and
plenty of deep thought."

"and that is almost everything," said rosalie.

"i believe it is," answered the frog; and by the simple process of
pulling another knob emptied a shovelful of coal on the fire out of the
chimney-side.

it was not long after this when rosalie prepared for bed. she rubbed the
liquid on her hands, and found it very soon relieved them. then she
drank the contents of the bottle and retired to the inner room, first
bidding the frog "good-night."

"i sleep on the doorstep," said it, "so you may sleep doubly secure.
nothing evil can cross me, for my life is charmed."

and, somehow or other, there seemed more life, strength, and
independence in this small creature than there had ever been in mariana.
poor mariana! rosalie fell asleep thinking of her, wondering how she had
taken the news of her escape, and whether mr. barringcourt indulged in
anything further than a frown when the truth was told to him.

but these thoughts did not keep her long out of the land of dreams.
perhaps it was that rosalie had enough to do thinking of her own affairs
just then. it never struck her that her escape could make any material
difference to mariana. she imagined her living the same even life, with
one real pleasure in the week in compensation for its darkness, and saw
within her mind the wedding-dress nearing completion, and trembled in
her sleep to think it soon must be finished and fade again to nothing
for want of one to wear it.

and in the night she dreamt the seeds were sown, the time of harvest
came, and every seed appeared as a huge and barren stone. then in
despair and disappointment she wept upon them, and they disappeared.

chapter xviii
seeds growing contrariwise

after that, life began in earnest for rosalie. for some weeks her days
were given to digging, her nights to mastering the alphabet of some
unknown language. it was all dry work, and very hard.

no one came near, except the frog, and she often found herself wishing
for more human companionship. but still it was not rosalie's nature to
grumble too much at circumstances. she contented herself with an
occasional sigh, and for the rest learnt to love the harsh, croaking
voice that had something to say about most things, and was always kind
enough to revive her drooping spirits with cheering words.

at last the plot of ground was all prepared, and considering it had been
digged by a woman, it was not at all badly done. no one would have known
the difference if they hadn't been told, though afterwards they might
have discovered the depth was not so great. however that may be, the
seeds were sown in it, and began doubtless to do their own little bit of
digging, and go down so far that no one could find them where they'd
first been put. after the sowing came the time of waiting. there was
much weeding, and more watering, for no drop of rain ever descended
there, and all had to be carried from a stream near by.

rosalie watched the ground impatiently to see when the first bright
blade would appear, but though she waited one month, two, three, four,
nothing at all except an occasional weed altered the surface of the
ground. and her whole heart was buried in that little garden. it seemed
as if it, too, must have taken root down there, away from the sunshine
and the warmth.

and the waiting was far worse than the working, for after three months
certainly something ought to have shown. but when it went on to four,
five, nay, at last came out into six long months, and nothing yet had
come to light, rosalie went back into the little hut, and laid her head
upon her arms upon the table, and cried from sheer disappointment and
low spirits. for during this time of waiting and subsequent doubt no one
had come to see her, no one at all, except the frog.

in this fit of depression, which was the first of its kind, the outcome
of disappointment and hope deferred, the frog spoke.

"what is it, rosalie? i've never seen you cry before."

"i can't stand it any longer, i know i can't. i've waited for six
months, with never a soul to speak to but you, and nothing has come up.
it's all a failure. my heart is as heavy as a stone. if it gets much
worse it will break right in two. i know it will."

"where is your heart?"

"it should be in my body, but i believe i must have sown it along with
the seeds in the garden, and it's turning to stone while they're
rotting."

then the frog spoke rather shyly, as one who fears to be ridiculed, and
is slightly apologetic.

"perhaps the seeds have turned to—to—to—stone, too," and it looked hard
in the fire instead of at rosalie.

she, however, looked across at it with eyes wide open.

"well, really! it doesn't seem unlikely, considering the time they are
in coming up."

"what will you do?" said the frog.

"i'll begin to dig again," cried rosalie.

"it's the wisest thing you've said since you came here," the frog
answered, and its colours flashed quite brilliantly.

so the next morning (for it was evening when they spoke to one another)
rosalie rose with a much lighter heart than for some time past, went out
into the garden with the fork, and began to dig. she dug all day, but
found nothing, till just at eventide she noticed something shining in
the dull, damp soil. she picked it out with her fingers very eagerly. it
was a dull enough looking stone for the most part, with here and there a
substance in it that shone like glass—not very brilliantly. whatever it
was, it was enough to brighten rosalie's spirits for the time being, and
as just then she heard the frog's voice calling her to tea, she made as
much haste forwards as she could over the clodding soil to show her
treasure.

"see what a beautiful thing i have found!" she cried, and held it up
triumphantly.

"it isn't very brilliant," said the frog, looking at it critically.

"don't you think so?"

"no. you do, because you've been looking at black soil all the day, but
i've been looking at the sun."

"well, but then the brightest thing would look dull if you compared it
with the sun. how am i to find out really what it is?"

"take it to my master."

"i can't open the gate."

"the gate will open of itself, if you've anything to take to him."

rosalie turned about to run off at once, but the other said:

"wait and have tea first. he is never at liberty till six, and now it's
only five."

so after tea, rosalie, having previously changed her heavy boots and
generally tidied herself, set off in the direction of the house.

the gate this time responded easily enough to her hand, and soon she was
walking through the garden, holding her stone the tighter, in that she
was quite sure, from the fact of the gate opening so readily, it must be
worth something very considerable.

the door leading into the garden was open, and after knocking she passed
through, and went at once to the study.

the curious thing about the sun here was that it always set at the same
time of day, and that between five and half-past, so that now twilight
had fallen, and the lamps were lit, though the blinds remained undrawn.

the governor sat as usual, and must have been expecting her, for he held
out his hand as she entered, saying:

"well, what have you brought?"

she placed it in the hand he held out, and waited whilst he looked at
it. this did not take very long, for almost on the instant he looked up,
and said:

"i'll send it to an expert in the city of lucifram, and get his opinion
on it."

"you think it is very valuable, then?"

"i'm afraid i don't, except in a way that doesn't count. but we'll send
it to someone who is unacquainted with the digging, and watering, and
heartburning it has necessitated, and therefore who will be less
prejudiced than i."

"when will you send it?"

"to-night; and you will hear the decision in something like a
fortnight."

so then she went away. the next two weeks were passed in waiting, and in
the study of those books which rosalie found more dry and difficult each
succeeding day. for there was no one to explain them, and in some parts
there seemed nothing but big full-stops and commas, with wide gaps
between.

but at the end of that time the frog came to her one morning and said
the governor wished to see her.

rosalie went in fear and expectation, and the first thing her eyes
lighted on was her stone upon the table. this, she felt, was not quite
as it should be.

"the decision is that it is rubbish."

that was all the governor said.

she felt rather miserable. she thought it must be with hurrying across
the garden. however, there was nothing to be said, and rosalie withdrew.
after that some very hard, frosty weather followed, and the ground was
so hard that for a long time she was able to do nothing—outside, at any
rate.

then when it thawed a little she went out and digged again, and found
just such another stone as the one before, only of a little lighter and
brighter substance.

after tea she took it to the governor, as last time. he promised to send
it to the city, and get the opinion of an expert upon it. rosalie
withdrew to wait. at the end of a fortnight she was again sent for to
the governor's house. her stone was on the table.

"the decision is that it is rubbish," said he.

and she felt disappointed this time, but not miserable. one is never
quite so sure of things after the first time—that is, if they've
miscarried. she went back again to the plantation and the hut. again the
ground had frozen, and for some time it was impossible to do anything,
even had she had the inclination.

after this, every time the thaw came rosalie set to work again, finding
the work a change and relief from study. and though the disappointment
always lasted out the frost, it always disappeared with the thaw. and
every time she went up to the house, the particular stone she had last
found lay on the table, and the words were:

"the decision is that it is rubbish."

this went on for a long while, till at last it seemed to rosalie all the
hope had been crushed out of her, and she went back to the garden and
found it quite frosted over. but after a while the frost broke, and the
frog, seeing rosalie made no attempt to go to dig, said to her:

"the frost has broken."

"i know."

"will you not go out into the garden?"

"no; i'm too impatient. i want the seeds to grow quicker than i can
learn. i've been thinking about it all, and i feel that i must wait.
bright stones take longer to grow than flowers, because they fade less
quickly."

thereupon the frog let fall a tear of gratitude, but turned the other
way during the odd process, so that rosalie never noticed it.

then followed a very long and dreary time, with no companionship;
nothing but the even days and dull books, and the sympathetic frog. and
this went on so long that many a time rosalie went out to look at the
ground, and sighed, but never thought of touching it, because something
had said "stand still." at last, after a very long time had gone by, she
went to bed one night, feeling particularly sad.

some hours later she awoke to find the moon shining full into the
chamber. she got up and dressed, and went through into the outer room.
the door was open, and the frog was sitting contemplatively upon the
step, looking out on to the beauties of the night. occasionally it gave
a croak of satisfaction.

rosalie went to the cellar and brought out the big fork, and thought she
was so quiet the frog had never seen her. but then, poor thing, its eyes
were so large, they stared out from every side of its head, and as she
approached the door it hopped down, and moved aside to let her pass.

"why don't you ask me what i'm going to do?" she said, laughing.

"that's plain to be seen," it answered, and hopped after her in the
moonlight.

suddenly rosalie began to dig, just on that portion of ground where a
shaft of moonlight had fallen. for some time nothing but loose soil came
up, but at last the fork hit upon something hard. it did not move till a
space had been cleared all round it, and then it appeared nothing but a
heavy hard mass of black earth, with an irregular surface.

"well?" said the frog.

"there are other tools in the cellar beside a fork," said she. "but
we've done enough for one night. it can stay now till the morning," and
she took it in both hands, and lifted it out of the deep trench dug
about it.

so then once more night reigned undisturbed. but with the morning work
began again, this time with finer instruments to chip away the thick
layers of soil and find what lay beneath. it took a very long time, much
longer than rosalie ever anticipated, though in other ways the hours
passed quickly under this keen absorption. in many places the soil
seemed more like marble than rock, and required much patience to remove
it, for none of the instruments were particularly sharp, nor specially
adapted for that purpose. but what of that? working, working, ever
unceasingly, on went rosalie, and one day she looked up at the frog, and
half laughed, and said:

"i believe my heart is inside here, and i'll never be happy till it's
free, quite free."

but the frog only turned away and sighed, and rosalie was so intent that
she never heard the sigh.

and at last!

bit by bit a brilliant jewel unfolded itself, all flashing
green-and-moonlight colour, and with one gleam of ruby red, just one
bright gleam upon the middle surface.

and she pressed it to her lips and kissed it. this was no dull stone
with intermittent flashes of light. no, this was _real_—a lovely thing
of sparkling colour.

it was finished just at sunset. she scarcely needed any tea, so eager
and impatient was she to get away.

and then she appeared before the governor with this precious prize.

"i've found something really, at last," said she, with bright eyes and
cheeks.

as of old he held his hand out for it, but said nothing.

"why don't you speak?" she asked.

"it is not for me to speak," he answered; and so she went away.

but rosalie was scarce content with waiting now. she doubted not that
all would see the value of the stone she had so lately found, and most
of all an expert. and indeed there seemed to be no time for waiting. the
voice said, "go on." truly the harvest was beginning. who would sit down
with but one sheaf tied?

and she was justified in doing so. another lump of hard black earth (to
be chipped away slowly and surely) appeared amongst the looser soil. and
after a time the under surface partly appeared, and it, too, as far as
she could see, was bright and brilliant.

but as this was in process the message arrived at breakfast, the
governor wished to see her.

she did not allow herself to think, because she dare not, but whatever
thought rose in her mind it was success.

she knocked at the study door and entered. there, in the same place that
all the others had been in turn, lay the shining jewel, and the cold
voice answered:

"the decision is that it is rubbish."

the pain within was so great that rosalie could have screamed, and then
came sickness and faintness, so that she leant against the door and
looked at him.

"what does it mean?" she asked.

"it is accounted of no worth."

"oh, but it is! it is!" she cried, and looked at him so hard that he
looked back at her.

"i have told you the decision."

"but what do _you_ say?"

"i say nothing."

"but what is wrong with it?"

"i believe the decision was that it was gaudy. it shone too much."

she looked at him dully, and then turned and went away.

there in the plantation was the work she was engaged on. her eyes were
too dull to see the sparkle of light, her heart too black to care. and
suddenly she laughed, and picking up the fork lying near, began to dig
again. the frog sat by and watched.

in furious haste, without apparent thought, she worked, and at last came
upon a much smaller mound, containing one much smaller stone of
transparent substance that had no lustre at all. but bitter tears were
running fast from her swollen eyes, and two of them flashed on it. when
she tried to rub them off upon her sleeve they seemed quite hardened,
and they never moved.

"is this gaudy?" she asked, turning suddenly to her companion.

"i don't think so," it answered meekly. and then she sighed.

"it seems to me it's hardly bright enough, except the tears."

and in the evening she went with it again to the governor.

after that the time was very short till she was again summoned to the
house.

and there the lesser jewel lay, just as she had brought it, and the
decision was once more that this was rubbish also.

then she turned to him, and cried bitterly:

"you gave me the seeds—what is wrong with them? i cannot alter them from
what they are."

"perhaps it would be best if now you left the garden," he answered
slowly, "seeing it is so profitless."

but she looked at him with straining eyes, and answered:

"i can't. it's the work i have been put to do, and i must finish it. i
told the frog i thought my heart was in that first hard mound, and i
believe it is. but there's something else beside my heart, and that's
there too, and i'll never be free till it is free. and what can i do? i
am mad. i see things beautiful that others only stare at, and then pass
by with scarcely one comment. and the old cruel voice keeps crying, ‘go
on! go on!' and whither can i go? the path is all so black that, forward
or backward, i am lost whichever way i turn."

then because he did not answer, she said at last:

"send it, the first i brought to you, that brilliant moonstone, to some
other place. the man who called it rubbish can't have any eyes."

"just as you like," he answered.

then she went away.

in the plantation there had set so hard a frost that everything was
white and stiff and ice-bound. there lay the half-chipped mound
containing the other jewel scarce yet visible. but rosalie had no heart
to touch it, even had the frost allowed her.

and no result came from sending the moonstone to another place. one
general and unanimous opinion: it had no value—that was all. and still
for months the blighting frost lay dead on everything.

in vain, with burning fever under the outward chill that froze her too,
did rosalie take the fork and try with what little strength was in her
arms to break the iron earth. nothing moved. it only made her recognise
the more the great impossibility, the strength of life imprisoned by the
frozen hands of death.

at last (for now the gate within the edge was never fast) she went again
to the governor.

"what am i to do?" she asked. "i can't get on with anything, nor move
either way. i've prayed to god a thousand times to give me peace or
break the ice, or let me get the price of freedom from that jewel which
i brought to you, and nothing ever answers, except in contradiction. i
prayed one night the thaw might come—a hundred times and more i prayed
it. in the morning a double frost had settled, petrifying hard as iron.
another night i prayed for peace and rest. i could not stand so terrible
a strain. i never dreamt as that night. ten times i dozed and woke
again, covered with sweat, all shivering in the cold, to think myself
alive within a coffin, buried within the ground. and most incessantly
that other prayer to reap the price of freedom with the stone, and as
you know, it lies here in your keeping—a useless thing, and judged
devoid of worth."

"you say your heart is in the stone," he answered.

"yes; i think it sends out shafts of brilliancy to pierce to that dull,
empty place, and prick it into fearful pain. what can i do? i've prayed
to god—what more can i do?"

"there is one thing more. you'd better give it up."

"oh! but that is everything—the whole of the little garden. for the
frost will never break till the stone is free, and i."

"you can give the garden back to god who gave it."

"but why give me a thing and take it back just when it's fit for using?"
and then a great pain and fear came into her eyes. "i would do as you
tell me, i would really, but i haven't the strength, and i'm afraid. the
frost is too strong for me. it freezes my heart, and leaves my mind
quite free, so that the blood courses through my brain in quickest time,
and then stops suddenly. it's worse than killing me. i'm going mad, and
what use am i to god, or how can i see the light of heaven, if once that
heavy cloud descends, and coupled with the frost, freezes upon my eyes
and lips, and eats out everything?"

"to trust in god is to be sane—have peace," he answered.

"ah, peace!" she answered greedily. "what does it mean? i know no
peace—nothing but the mocking, cruel voice that says ‘go on!' and shows
no way."

"it's the stone, rosalie, that stands in your light, and blocks the way.
can't you see it?"

"i expect i'm very blind. i'm not clever enough to understand. i haven't
spirit enough to find a way out. mr. barringcourt told me so, and he
knew best. i was handicapped from the beginning to be born without a
tongue."

"but that difficulty, and still another, has been surmounted."

"yes, but i did nothing myself."

"fiddlesticks!" said the governor, and he spoke so naturally that
rosalie laughed, even though not particularly brightly.

"well, i didn't do much myself. i don't see how i could."

"you did as much as was necessary, which is never in any case very much;
and now there is one little thing more to be done—give it up."

"i dare not," she said; "it would send me mad. if it would kill me i
wouldn't mind." and she looked down to hide the light in her eyes.

"give it up to god. do you trust god and think he will forsake you?"

"no; it's myself i am not sure of."

"you should be part of god."

"not here."

"where else, then?"

"in heaven."

"it begins on earth for those of sufficient intelligence; and for the
others, they do not count."

"i'm one of the last, then. it is so hard, so very, very hard, and i
have no strength at all."

then a very long silence followed—the terrible fight between weakness
and trust, between blind ignorance and all-conquering wisdom, the
spirit's humble discipline; and at last she turned to him, and said:

"i'll give it up! and if i sacrifice my heart or head, it's all the
same, seeing god is the receiver, and he knows best."

and then she turned away, with the knowledge of having done some duty
that now seemed extremely simple.

but the governor rose from his chair, and came towards her, and took her
in his arms, and kissed her cheek, and the caressing action reminded her
somehow of that time long ago, when mr. barringcourt laid his hand upon
her shoulder in the temple.

bur that kiss seemed to revive her strength, and give some of that peace
she had so lately craved for.

yet this reward was so very unexpected. it never occurred to her that
the governor could possibly care whether she walked right or wrong,
except, perhaps, as a spectator. but the magnetic sympathy of that kiss,
and the great, but gentle, strength in his arms as he drew her to him,
awoke her eyes to the fact that here was her friend, the only one she
had ever known, maybe would ever meet.

but being too full of feeling for words she slipped quietly towards the
door, and crossed the lawn towards the hut.

that was her little home, to be filled with contentment and happiness,
in which it would be her task to dig graves for bitterness, repining,
and wild craving and longing for that which was not to be. it would be a
hard task. rosalie recognised it as she looked at the frozen mounds of
soil, whose digging had occasioned so much eagerness and anticipation.

and in her mind she looked below the frozen surface of the plantation to
where other jewels all lay buried, and she had given them up to god, and
they must lie there.

but the kiss and the strength of those strong arms had worked a miracle
for her. she no longer felt the weak restlessness and alternate
blackness of despair and madness. she went into the little hut bravely,
with tears trembling on her eyelids, partly the outcome of the struggle
she had gone through, and partly of a vague sense of happiness and
satisfaction that was beginning to glow within, like some glowing light
of summer. later she said to her companion:

"there was a man who healed my tongue for me, healed it with light, and
now i think my heart is being healed, and it is still light, light,
light, on the poisonous darkness."

"then you have given up the moonstone. it was a dangerous stone. i like
the little tear-stained one the best."

"and i love it too," said rosalie. "it gave me work to do at the time i
most needed it, and set my mind on the road it has travelled ever
since."

then she took down the lesson-books, and found to-night they were much
more understandable, and it was with growing lightness of spirit that
she slept that evening.

chapter xix
a humble crucifixion

the next morning sunshine and warmth had come, the frost risen and fled.
the birds were singing in the forest, and the melting icicles had none
of the dispiriting effect of thaw, but sparkled in the sunshine. the
ground was free.

rosalie went out and took the fork and began the old process—digging. it
took a long, long time, days, and weeks, and months, to chip away the
soil from the new mound.

and at last the first bright ray—uncheckered—burst through. rosalie
started up with a cry. the frog hopped up to witness. both of them shed
a tear of joy and admiration that glistened like a pearl, though dull
beside this other. at last a gem of purest brightness was displayed,
that shone with so soft a radiance, yet so pure and bright, that it lit
up the garden like the bright sun on an early summer's morning, and
seemed a dazzling emblem of light.

and rosalie said: "this is the light which cures as well as
beautifies—the talisman against all ills—the gift of god, the pearl
above all price; never pearl shone like to it, or diamond, or ruby, or
any stone dug from the mines or caves. i'll take it to the governor.
none can fail but to acknowledge its beauty, if but for the one central
spark from the raised inner surface."

and she took it to him, but as she offered it, said nothing, and he
showed no surprise, but smiled gravely, as one who might approve in
silence, but said no words.

so rosalie waited, and in a shorter time than she had ever stayed
before, less than a week, was sent for by the governor.

the flashing jewel was on the table by his side. he looked across at
her, but her eyes were fixed upon the stone. so soon, and it was back!
and the time it had taken to dig! and the long months of blackness
before! and at last her eyes travelled slowly from it back to his face.

and he said with curious intonation: "the decision is the same as
hitherto."

"but god's decision! tell me that!" and the pain in her voice was very
terrible.

"the decision of god is that it is as he has made it."

"that is sufficient. thank you," and she moved away; strong only in the
friendship of that silent man, who in so few words conveyed so much of
meaning.

so once more she made her way to the little hut, where the frog as usual
sat waiting; but her lips were set in a smile so stony, that she said
never a word, but sat down in her chair by the fire, and forgot to try
to form even a syllable.

at last her eyes lighted on the frog sitting there upon the hearth. its
big, wide, mournful mouth drooped at the corners, and its round saucer
eyes were brimming with tears, yet there was something very comic in its
attitude—so much so that rosalie laughed. at this it jumped so literally
that had it not borne a charmed life it would certainly have settled in
the fire, but as it was, it came down inside the fender, and then hopped
out.

"ah! when you laugh in sorrow your heart must needs be broken
altogether," it said.

"oh, no! i feel nothing, nothing at all, one way or the other, only hard
and empty, and sorry, not for myself, but for others, that they should
be so blind."

"it's well you feel hard. it doesn't do to feel soft at times like
this," said the frog, and tried to speak cheerfully, but somehow failed.

outside a white mist was settling, so silently that they never noticed
it. but just then the frog piled more coal on the fire, and soon the
room looked very cheerful.

"come and sit on my knee," said rosalie presently; and she almost
laughed again at the rapidity with which her request was granted.

although they had lived together so long, this was, as it were, the
first time she had seen the frog close.

she took one of its little feet in her fingers, and noticed it was
pierced with a hole. then in turn she looked at each foot separately,
and found the same mark in each.

"how did you come by these? they look as if they must have been very
painful at one time."

"it was very stupid of me," said the frog shyly. "generally i put a
jewel into each, and everyone remarks about my pretty feet, but to-day,
with thinking about your affairs, i forgot. it was most negligent of
me."

"where did you get the jewels from?"

"my master said i found them by myself, but i think he really gave them
to me."

"but tell me about these holes, unless you'd rather not."

"it's a short and very common story," it answered evasively; "i don't
think it would interest you."

"indeed it would; you have been so kind to me all along that i know you
won't deny me this."

"well, there was a time when i used to be a very ordinary little frog,
jumping about, and eating all that i could get. and i was very vain of
my appearance, for i knew that my coat was brighter than any of my
neighbours, and i wished them to know it too. but i wasn't content with
being admired by my own kith and kin; i thought i should like to gain
the admiration of mankind as well. instead of confining myself to the
shrubs and well in the garden, i contrived to make myself plainly seen
by hopping about the paths. there were no children in the house
adjoining, so that i felt doubly safe, for the two servant maids used to
walk in the garden often at dusk, and talk about their sweethearts, and
at these times they always found a kind and flattering word for me.
meeting with such kind treatment from them, i grew doubly proud, and
formed the erroneous idea that all mankind was equally kind and simple.
i made no doubt that had i been taken before the queen, my manners,
colour, and deportment would have astonished her, and called forth her
admiration. as discontentment had first grown toward my own people, so
at last it grew towards the maid-servants. i wanted more than two
admirers, and almost lost my brilliant colour pining for them. about
this time, however, my old mother died, and what with the nursing of
her, and seeing to her respectable removal afterwards, i had little time
for thinking of myself. but when things had settled themselves again, my
old longing revived. i must go out along the paths again and try to gain
more admiration.

"now, there lived in that house a man. he always wore spectacles, and
whenever he walked in the garden always carried a book, and from what i
could gather from the maids' conversation, was really very clever. now,
being myself very ignorant, i naturally admired clever people, and a
great longing grew in my mind to gain his approbation and attention. so
whenever he walked out in the garden, i watched my opportunity, and
hopped along the path beside him. but for a long time he either never
noticed me, or if he did do so, was never attracted by my charms. this
upset me so much that my health became visibly enfeebled. i felt that if
he could but see it, i might become of value in his eyes, and thus raise
myself in his good graces and esteem. still, i felt i could not give in,
for i had a friend of somewhat duller coat always watching me, ready to
say upon the first occasion: ‘i told you so.' so i continued hopping by
his side in these walks, which, of late, had become habitual. but one
day, as he came down the path, he closed his book, and his eyes suddenly
lighted on me. i know not what the expression in them was, but my vanity
took it favourably. i sat there as still as a frog can sit, because i
had heard it was a sign of good breeding to sit still, and pretended to
be gazing at the sun, because i thought it would appear good taste to
admire a thing so generally esteemed. and he stood still too, but i was
quite content that _he_ should be admiring _me_. it would have
disappointed me had he turned his attention likewise to the sun.
suddenly he stooped down, and made a grab in my direction. i had almost
waited for this, and being prepared, hopped quickly to one side. i felt
it would not enhance my charms to be caught too quickly. he made no
further attempt to catch me, but went back into the house, and i heard
my friend of the duller coat laughing, as much as to say, ‘i told you
so.' but i pretended to consider we had made great advances. in a little
while, however, he came out again. he carried in his hand a curious
string thing, which is called a net, and this he laid with great
ingenuity across the path where he and i had previously been walking.
this i took as a great compliment; the ground was evidently not good
enough for me to walk upon. over this he spread a few crumbs. they were
not, certainly, to my mind, as i liked more tasty things, but i thought
he had probably noticed my fragile appearance, and was showing his
sympathy with my delicacy. so to show my trust in and appreciation of
him, after a little coquettish skipping on the edge, i hopped straight
to the centre of the net. he was kneeling by the side, and i must admit
my heart beat loudly at my own boldness, but still remembering the
kindness of the maids, the only human beings that i knew, i felt no
particular or definite fear. in fact, i felt like some great queen
before a kneeling courtier. but the next moment i was much upset to find
the net swung over me, and both of us caught roughly and inelegantly
from the ground, in a manner i had never before experienced. i
struggled, but only succeeded in getting one leg through the net. my
position was indeed perilous. the last thing i heard in the garden was
the laughter of my friend who had the duller coat. so can the frog heart
be upon occasion very hard.

"i was thrown down afterwards upon a table that had neither moss nor
anything else upon it, still enveloped in the hateful net, so that there
was no chance of me getting away, and there i stayed for a long time,
choking with fear and partial suffocation."

a tremor ran through its little body.

"i shouldn't like to speak of all that followed. as frogs go, and being
cold-blooded, i can stand a fair amount. but that was neither here nor
there. i don't know how long i lived there, but it was a long time, and
almost every day i was put to some torture or other. often others used
to come in to see how the different inflictions affected me, and once
someone remonstrated with him, and said i must suffer; but he said he
was always very careful with me, and the other one seemed satisfied.

"‘besides,' he added, ‘it is in the cause of science. and what little
inconveniences may be suffered by this reptile may be the means of
saving many lives.'

"that night as i was lying in my prison, with every limb aching and
swollen, and big pains shooting through my body, i thought on his words.
it was only the extreme pain that kept me from growing proud, so instead
i felt a little thankful.

"but after that the times of torture were growing more frequent, or i
less able to bear them, and i longed and prayed to something i couldn't
understand to set me free. and one day, as he took me out of my cell, he
said to someone who was with him at the time—i think he called him his
assistant: ‘this thing is on its last legs; i'll just try one more
experiment with it, and then it can be thrown to the midden.'

"that was a little comfort to me.

"but just then he ran something through my hand that made me struggle
and gasp with pain, and then the other three, and i was lying fast
nailed to a board, and could not even struggle. i'll never forget it,
though the worst never comes back to me. it was the last time, the last
time with a vengeance, and there i died. and i think i must have looked
very queer at the last, for the last thing i was conscious of was that
someone laughed. but how could one compose one's features nailed to a
board, and suffering agony. and when i woke up i was in this pretty
garden, and i was as feeble as a baby. but my master tended me with his
own hands, and before long i had grown strong and happy again, and less
wishful to been seen. and though my coat is brighter now than ever it
had been, i think less of it and more of other things. but even now it's
sweet to hear a little praise, and never anyone has come to see my
master but they have a pleasant word for me."

"then why do you stay with me? you should be hopping in the garden, not
in this dull place."

"oh, i asked to come. i knew you'd have a deal of sorrow once you came
here; it's meant to be a place of sorrow; and i remembered that period
of my own life when i was all alone without companions. and i think if
someone could have come to me and said, ‘cheer up, croaker, it'll soon
all be over,' i would have felt a trifle stronger for the end."

"was your name croaker?" asked rosalie gently, for the story had much
affected her.

"yes; i used always to be longing to be called ‘bright coat' or ‘slim
body,' or one of those names when i was young, but my parents had
different thoughts from me, and gave me just a family name. the
scientists sometimes called me ‘goggle eyes,' and i believe my eyes did
grow unnaturally big whilst i was there."

"it's very kind of you to stay with me when i'm so dull."

"you're not dull," said the frog. "no one is, unless they do nothing but
nurse their sorrow, and expect other people to carry both them and it."

rosalie laughed.

"yes, one has a great deal to learn," she answered, and took down a book
from the shelf.

and hereafter most of her time was given to learning, for the
lesson-books had suddenly developed into coherent reading. they were
still hard and dull, and many a time she would have given up but for the
ever-ringing voice that revived her lagging spirits, and above all the
remembrance of that jewel of pure light, the like that she had seen
within the temple.

outside the mist still continued heavy and white, so that it was
impossible to find the way about. it hung like a heavy curtain. this
continued for a long time, until one day it gradually lightened, and in
a week's time the sky was clear again.

"i'm going to dig again," said rosalie to the frog, laughing. "i feel i
am intended to. the ground is soft, and though my eagerness has gone, i
still can work when there is opportunity."

and so in the same way she unbedded another stone, and though it was
smaller than the last, and not of the same worth by any means, it had
its merits, and one pure flash in the centre to show it was related to
the larger one. having given it into the governor's hands, she returned
to her own dwelling, and waited some short time.

but one day as she was going round the plantation, holding a book and
reading, with the frog hopping by her side, she was startled to hear
someone calling over the gateway, "good morning, rosalie!" and looking,
she beheld billy standing there, his arms folded over it, and his face
all laughing, as was usual when he came.

"good morning!" said she, and her eyes brightened at such a change in
the day's programme.

"i've brought you bad news."

"ah! then don't repeat it. i know already what it is," and rosalie
sighed.

"you know, i don't think you're ever going to get out of this little
paddock," said he.

"i don't think so myself. soon i shall be getting past breaking in."

"how do you like digging?"

"oh, i've taken to it fairly well, thanks to my little friend croaker
here. i regard myself as a worm, and feel lowly contentment. many a time
i have thought myself dead and the sun set."

"you must be very wretched to wish yourself dead."

"yes, the day is intensely long."

"the worm will develop."

"with a bruised head?"

"it's imagination! a second miracle, and the worm becomes a serpent."

"i would much rather remain as i am. the worm is harmless—the serpent
dangerous; the one a little use—the other useless."

"and you from lucifram!"

"ah! your mind was fixed on one particular serpent. defend me from it."

"you don't look much older, rosalie, for all your work."

"but you were tall before, and now you're taller. you actually seem
older than i, and when first i saw you i reckoned you quite ten years
younger."

"well, you've been burrowing in the ground. i've been advancing. it
makes all the difference. what effect has my news had upon you?" he
continued.

"oh! for a change it has made me angry."

"has the worm turned?"

"i believe it has been so long in a state of constant wriggle that one
turn more or less makes little difference."

"suppose you leave your unprofitable trade, and come away?"

she took two steps forward with a thankful heart, and then a great
stubbornness rose within her. she shook her head.

"i won't go yet," she said. "it would be giving up too early. i have
pleased god, and by god's grace i'll please man, and if man is not to be
pleased by god's grace, what is it that can please him?"

"that is a question for my father. i should not like to say. what do you
intend to do here now?"

"dig again. begin to-day. there is no frost, and the ground is soft and
loose."

"is that the message i'm to return?"

"i can think of no other. it was good of you to bring the news to me."

"i thought it very ill. i never delivered an unpleasant message in my
life before, and did it just for practice. i had much rather have told
you the other thing."

"your face was very expressive of sorrow when you came to me."

"i'm glad. i imagined my countenance was too smiling."

she laughed.

"never look sad on my account. i have no wish to forfeit your company
for a sad mask. indeed, i counted it a very great kindness your coming
to me at all."

"truly, rosalie, you are improving. i think you must be growing older."

"i've forgotten my age. it's a thing women never remember. years were a
form of imaginative punishment invented by the devil. some folks are
sensitive about them."

"when you have finished this, will you bring it to my father?"

"most certainly; who else could i take it to?"

"he has brought you little luck."

"it's a word i should never use in connection with him."

"well, i will leave you, and may you be prosperous. i don't know what
else i can say, except that you will forgive me for the news i brought."

so saying, he turned about, and went away again.

and the old work began once more.

chapter xx
a simple conversation

one day, when rosalie had about completed the stone she was engaged
upon, the governor sent for her, by the frog.

"and i think," said brightcoat, for rosalie had changed its name, not
liking croaker, "that it would not be at all a bad plan for us to look
and see if there are any new clothes anywhere about. this old dress you
are wearing is most worn and shabby."

"there are none," said she. "i have looked many a time, and have never
found anything except the coarse brown apron i wear to protect my dress
from the soil."

"well, there's a time, and not a time, for looking for things. suppose
we look in the little wardrobe together now. if you stay dinner with the
governor, you must be fairly suitably dressed for it."

and what was rosalie's surprise, on looking in the diminutive
dress-closet, to find a pretty dress of softest silk, white and apple
green, just ready made to fit her figure, and everything besides to
match, even to silken stockings and pretty slippers, and a cluster of
red and golden leaves upon the dressing-table, as simple and pretty as
the rest.

rosalie, from feeling old as the hills, suddenly felt young as a
blue-bell blowing on an early summer morning.

"oh, brightcoat! i never felt so happy in my life. to get rid of this
old black and red thing! why, that in itself is paradise. but to wear
these! it's past belief. now, if you were me, how would you wear your
hair—high or low? which do you think suits me?"

"i say in that loose bundle at the back you used to wear when you first
came to us."

"the way mariana did it."

"was it?"

"yes. oh, dear, dear! i'm afraid i shan't do it a bit nicely. when you
try to do your hair nicely it always looks hideous; have you ever
noticed that?"

"no; you see i haven't got any."

"of course not! my dress is almost the exact colours of your skin. have
you noticed it?"

"yes. my master said the colours were chosen out of compliment to me."

"how delightful! frog green! it's quite an innovation in fashions, and a
very pretty one."

brightcoat's eyes sparkled with pleasure at this little bit of innocent
flattery, and if it showed vanity, vanity of a sort is a very delightful
thing.

so rosalie dressed with fluttering happiness and eager haste.

"your hair doesn't look a bit as if you'd taken pains with it," said the
frog from the bed, where it was sitting.

"what do you mean?" she asked, with sudden alarm.

"it's very becoming."

"i'd rather your flattery was a little less open. i know you mean well,
but it's embarrassing to have one's defects spoken of so charmingly."

by this time the dressing was completed, and in the eyes of her simple
companion no one had ever looked more lovely.

"you must come too, brightcoat. i shouldn't think of leaving you here
alone. besides, you are always welcome at the house, and i am only there
on suffrage. if i behave badly i must go. it's a very terrible thing
that, when you think about it. enough to make me tremble and shake all
over."

so the frog jumped lightly from the bed on to her shoulder, and made a
most delightful ornament.

as they walked across the garden to the house the nightingales were
singing in the soft still air of night.

the governor, who was walking on the terrace, greeted his guests, and
they passed into the house, which was all brilliantly lit to receive
them.

"this is your last night with us, so i have asked you here to dine with
me," said the old man.

"my last night?" her voice was full of wonder and sadness.

"you surely will not be sorry to leave the soil?"

"ah! but you and brightcoat are here. i would much rather stay. besides,
my heart is in the garden yet, and here with the jewels that i brought
to you. oh, you have been my friend; and there is none other. where else
can i go? let me still live in the little hut, with the freedom i have
bought to-night."

but he shook his head and smiled as they sat down to dinner just alone.

"you imagine you have become attached to the hut. but there are other
and better places, believe me."

"and does the way back lead as i came?"

"pretty much so, i believe."

"into marble house, with its shadows and cobwebs. i'm sure i daren't
go."

"perhaps it has become less shadowy since you were there. there is
spring cleaning, you know, in all well-regulated houses."

"but it is not well regulated. there is one part all moths and mildew,
and people live in it, or rather work there. i know, for mariana does.
how i should love to see her once again! and upstairs it is wretchedly
lit. in fact, mr. barringcourt's private room was the only human-looking
place i ever saw there. but perhaps by now he has a wife. but she'll
need great strength of mind to get the necessary repairs done, i'm
thinking. he seemed as if he would be very conservative, except where
things affected his own comfort."

"i don't think he's got a wife yet," said the governor.

when they had finished the meal, and the frog had had its full share of
the dainties that were to its taste, the governor led the way to his own
room, and placing a chair for rosalie near the fire, he drew his own to
the other side of the fireplace and sat down.

"do you object to smoke?" he asked.

"oh, no! uncle had a pipe that he had smoked for years and years and
years. and the night before he died he let it fall, and it broke. i
remember how sad he looked at the time—and perhaps there was more in it
than just the breaking of the pipe, for he said nothing, but that he
could soon get a new one. and if all things had been right i think it
would have angered him."

"you were greatly attached to your uncle?"

"oh, yes! i loved them both. no one could have been kinder to me than
they."

"and now, when you go back to lucifram, you have neither friend nor
relation to go to."

"no. must i indeed go?"

"i see no other way for it. but there are some friends of mine live
there, or friends of someone that i know. they will fill, to the best of
their ability, the old place."

"how do you know? they might take the utterest distaste to me on first
sight, and then what would happen?"

"they are not people of prejudice."

"i wish i were not."

"you fear, then, you may take a dislike to them?"

"oh, no! i'm always trying to get the better of my feelings, because
they are so often wrong."

"well," said he, "second thoughts are best. i give you the benefit of a
second opinion upon most things."

"but there is where i fear to go back to lucifram. it's a place where
one is so terribly misjudged, and it's a place, too, where you have just
the knack of saying the things you wished unsaid."

"well, then, choose. will you go back, or will you stay?"

but rosalie, on second thoughts, made answer:

"you know best, and it is for you to choose. somehow, i could not think
to doubt or question what you say; and after all, why should one bother
about to-morrow, if one does one's duty to-day."

"and i have promised you friends in the place of your aunt and uncle."

"yes; but i thought mr. barringcourt might have a word to say about
that."

"well, we're all bound to trust the future to a certain extent. there is
no telling; on second acquaintance he might prove kinder."

"when must i go?"

"to-morrow, in the early morning. the journey takes a day; it will be
dark before you reach your journey's end, for autumn is far advanced
with them."

here the frog, who had so far sat quiet on the hearthrug, put in a word.

"it will be very lonely going back to lucifram alone. my advice and
companionship might be of some little help occasionally."

"oh, yes!" cried rosalie eagerly. "you have been such a faithful and
loving friend to me, that your brightness would dispel half the gloom,
i'm sure it would."

both of them turned their eyes toward the governor to gain his opinion.

"you bear a charmed life, little frog," said he, "so i don't see what
harm or inconvenience can happen to you. in fact, i think the outing
would be a pleasant trip for you, and add something to your store of
knowledge."

"you don't think," said rosalie anxiously, for second thoughts were
beginning to intrude themselves, "that any harm could come of it. i
remember mr. barringcourt saying something about vivisection once. it
would be terrible if anything happened, and i was powerless to prevent
it."

"i don't think anything could happen," replied the governor. "a frog
that has once jumped from lucifram successfully to heaven could, on a
pinch, repeat the process with much less inconvenience."

and soon after this the interview and evening ended.

chapter xxi
a man who stood on his head, according to lucifram

the two wanderers were standing once more in the cold, inhospitable
streets of lucifram. but they were not alone. a tall lady descending
from her carriage had noticed the forlorn rosalie, and pitying her tired
condition had taken her within her house, promising her one night's
shelter at least. it may be simply stated to whom rosalie in this hour
of need had come. in this particular house in lime tree square of the
chief city of lucifram there lived a very great painter and his sister.
in his early youth he had had a hard struggle, not so much because he
was poor, but because he was original. now, for a man to have his own
ideas in the city of lucifram was to set all the dogs barking, the mob
stone-flinging, and the riot act fluttering.

it was very strange, but thousands of years of experience had taught
little or nothing.

the painter, as has been said, had his own ideas, and so at first they
said he was an upstart, and very justly laughed at him. but laughter
never yet cured madness or stamped out the truth, and as the painter
seemed to be giving surreptitious invisible spiritual bites all round
him, and setting the infection flying, it was recognised at last there
must be some truth in his madness, and to a certain extent they let him
be.

and so from being badly abused the painter at last sprung into fame. he
was a shy and reserved man, and somewhat irritable in his temper. but
that was because his temperament and his work were of a kind that wear
the nerves unevenly. but still when he liked he could be very charming,
even lucifram admitted that, and for the hidden virtues, they left those
with a shrug to god the serpent.

and so in comparative early middle age he found himself the recipient of
a knighthood; that is, he received a title very similar to "sir"—and for
simplicity we will call it such. some spiteful people said this was on
account of his good looks, but as it was a man sovereign who gave him
the title, it's hard to see what that could have to do with it. now, sir
john himself had little belief in titles, but his sister had great
belief in _him_, and though herself the simplest of plain women, she had
ambitions so far as he was concerned.

"a title's an empty thing," said he, looking at her in his serious,
thoughtful way.

"no one knows it better than i," she answered, in her downright one.
"and if you hadn't the real thing to outshine it, i'd hate to see it
offered to you. but it's a courtesy you owe to the world in return for
its courtesy. if you don't accept it, you are churlish. besides, i
always think it's the greatest honour that can befal a sovereign, to
confer distinction upon genius, so that, even on a royal consideration,
i think you ought to accept."

and so plain john crokerly became sir john, and was just the same before
and after—neither more or less brilliant or imposing.

from being poor he became rich. he never married, but continued happily
in the society of his one unmarried sister. the affection and
understanding were very mutual, and perfectly to the contentment of
both.

on this particular night miss crokerly entered her brother's presence
with some trepidation. after all, she had a reputation for common sense,
though, like him, maybe a little eccentric, and the brightness of the
frog and the prettiness of rosalie's face hardly seemed pretext enough
on second thoughts for inviting her into the house.

"john," said she, betraying no misgiving in her voice, as she closed the
door, "i've invited a young girl from the country, who is lost, to come
in and shelter for the night."

"what's her name?" and he looked up over the top of the paper which he
was reading, for daylight was precious just then, and morning meals too
hasty to allow of much newspaper indulgence during them.

"i don't know; she is a perfect stranger to me. i came to see if you
approved."

"it won't matter to me. i shan't see her," he answered.

"of course not." then, after a pause: "you think i'm not running any
risks by bringing her in?"

"i don't know. you can't very well turn her out again now you've done
it. small-pox is pretty prevalent, to be sure. did you make particular
inquiries if she'd been successfully vaccinated?"

"you have no objection to what i've done?"

"not after you've done it," and he relapsed once more behind the paper.

but miss crokerly, after turning to the door, looked round again.

"i should like you to see her," she said, for her, very hesitatingly.

"in the morning," he answered.

"in the morning you will have less time and inclination than now."

"but what purpose should i serve in going to look at her? is she
different from the generality of country folk?"

"i don't know," she replied slowly; "but i think she is much prettier.
and she has with her a frog with the most brilliant colour i ever saw."

at this he laughed. "my curiosity is not excited in the least," he
answered.

"but mine _is_," she said, with a return to her decided manner; "and you
really must come, if but to see the frog. it is a marvel."

"bring it here to me, then."

"certainly not, unless i bring her too. you are growing terribly lazy,
jack."

"well, come along," he said impatiently. "only please don't drag me into
any more of your charitable whims, frogs or no frogs."

"of course not. this is an exception. you might ask her her name and
address. i quite forgot to do so."

so together they went into the hall where rosalie still sat. the frog,
with a wisdom born of its dead vanity, had again settled itself
conspicuously to attract attention on her shoulder.

rosalie's pale face and large bright eyes also possessed a peculiar
beauty and fascination, although she was tired with the journey and sick
from want of food.

now, sir john's heart was as kind as that of his sister, and, moreover,
he had a great admiration for woman when her beauty was of that delicate
yet exquisite type that approaches the ideal, and contains little of the
heaviness or substantiality of flesh. as they both came toward her,
rosalie rose, and her movements were so quiet, graceful, and well-bred,
that one might have thought the frog's spirit of wishing to do the
correct thing for the sake of admiration had settled upon her. all his
irritability, which was not of a very lasting or savage kind, vanished.

"you have a delightful little companion there," said he pleasantly,
looking at the frog.

"yes."

"it is rather an uncommon kind of pet," put in miss crokerly; "and how
brilliant! is it real, or some highly-polished stone?"

rosalie laughed softly.

"oh! it is real enough, and can jump prodigiously." and she put her hand
up caressingly to its coat.

"and you," said sir john—"you look tired. what part of the country have
you come from to get lost in the city?"

"i have been walking all day. i came from a little hut and plantation
beyond the forest."

at this the painter looked at his sister and she at him. for outside
this city of lucifram there was a tremendous forest full of jungles, and
only the pure in spirit and those led by a light of superhuman
brightness could pass through it.

"and did you pass through the forest unhurt?" he asked.

"yes. we were pleasant company to each other. but i lost one of my
garden clogs. i think that was very unfortunate, because i never missed
it till it was too late to turn back."

she spoke evidently without any knowledge of the terrors of the forest.
but whatever reticence she showed about her journey was from now
respected by them.

"then you have no home to return to?" said miss crokerly, after a pause,
during which she had revolved things in her mind.

"no," said rosalie simply, and her wistful eyes filled with anxiety and
shadow.

"you must spend the night here, then, as i said before, and in the
morning we will arrange things. come with me."

then sir john shook hands with her in that grave, kind way of his, and
wished her good-night, and then went back to his easy-chair and paper.

he himself knew something of the terrors and blackness of the forest. it
had been responsible for some of his best work. but he was a man whose
hair was turning grey, and this girl, whose name, by the way, he had
forgotten to ask, appeared so very young. he was interested in, and felt
sorry for her, and yet could scarcely credit the tale that she had come
hither from the forest; on second thoughts it seemed so utterly
improbable.

yet where else anywhere upon lucifram could that brilliant frog have
come from—or rosalie's expressive, shining eyes?

so when his sister came back later in the evening, he said:

"i think, for the present, at any rate, we must keep her. providence has
sent her to us, and converts a duty into pleasure."

"yes, indeed. she has had supper and gone to bed. and strange to say,"
she continued reflectively, "although for the last twenty-five years i
have been trying to cure myself of impulsiveness as one of my besetting
sins, and was just thinking as i drove home to-night that at last i had
quite succeeded, yet now i cannot help loving her at sight, as much,"
she added softly, "as if she were my own sister."

"that is fortunate for her," replied he. "she appears so destitute."

"and i don't doubt fortunate for me. it is not often one receives a
traveller from the forest."

"you have ascertained, then, that she really came from there?"

"of course! i ascertained it by attending simply to her voice and
manner. one needs no other guarantees."

"well, i can but hope your friendship stands the test of time. for
myself, i can only say, as usual, i think you showed true discernment in
admitting her to shelter for the night, though at first, to speak
truthfully, i must admit your conduct greatly astonished me. what is her
name?"

"rosalie paleaf."

chapter xxii
a new lease of life

when rosalie awoke next morning, it was in a comfortable modern bedroom,
furnished with regard to health, and a conception of beauty thrown in.

for the first time truly in her life and experience she awoke with a
light heart, and such unusual brightness of spirits that she seemed at
last, for the time at least, to have realised the pleasure and joy of
simply being alive. the tired sickness of the night before had entirely
vanished.

the sky overhead was blue and bright, the air cold. nothing could have
been more promising for a new entry into an old world.

brightcoat, who had spent the night on the marble washing-stand, now
took recreation in the basin of water rosalie poured for him, whilst
she, being less cold-blooded, as it were, was nothing loath to accept
the warm water that was brought for her.

but this part of the day's programme being finished, rosalie turned
disconsolately to her dress.

"it's so shabby and short," said she.

"well, look amongst your luggage," said brightcoat, who was engaged in
jumping for further recreation over all the articles on the washstand.

"my luggage," said she, looking towards the little hand-bag. "it can't
be in there."

"no harm in looking," said the frog, and jumped clean over the
water-jug, and then sat as still as if jumping were the last thing it
would ever think of doing.

rosalie laughed, and then opened the bag and looked.

there was packed into that little leather hand-bag everything to make a
perfect though not extravagant outfit. a coat and skirt that no
fashionable tailor would be ashamed to turn out, a pretty, simple dress
for household wear, the evening dress which she had worn the other
night, slippers, gloves, and all accessories. last but not least, there
was a little box of jewellery in perfect taste and finish.

"oh, brightcoat, look, look!" she cried, as one after the other she drew
out those new delights. "who can have done it? i don't think it could
have been the governor. i'm sure he never bothered much about one's
clothes."

and then the frog's voice fell to a reverent whisper, so it almost
seemed.

"i once saw the governor's wife pack a christmas box for a little boy a
long way off at school, and it was quite miraculous."

"was he her son?"

"oh, no! at least, not exactly her son. but she was very fond of him.
she forgot nothing, and sent it in such little room that no one thought
she was sending anything much at all."

"you have seen her, then?"

"yes, i've seen her; and never anything more absolutely beautiful. it
was she who put her tender, gentle hand upon me when first i came all
dead and dull and stunned from lucifram, and by her radiating brightness
changed my poor coat to brilliancy. but have you turned out all the
contents of your bag?"

"yes. no. here are two letters. one for me and one to sir—john—crokerly.
who's he, i wonder?"

"the man who lives here," said the frog, who was primitive, and believed
in calling men men, and women women, with no thought of discourtesy, but
from lack of education in those matters.

"the gentleman," said rosalie. "he's sure to be a gentleman if he has a
title. but how do you know his name?"

"well, i heard someone speak of the—the lady last night as miss
crokerly, and they said something about sir john. and putting two and
two together, i've come to the conclusion it is he who lives here."

"how strange!"

"stranger things have happened. have you read your letter?"

"no," and she broke open the envelope. at first she read it seriously,
then burst out laughing.

"what is it?" asked brightcoat eagerly, who, having long ago got over
the seriousness of vanity, could enjoy a joke.

"oh, this letter! it's been written in a kind of rhyme, and i'm sure i
don't know what it means. it seems utter nonsense."

"if it's not very private, and you read it aloud, i might be able to
help you," the frog replied courteously.

"well, listen. there is no address. it begins:

"‘the road of life
is the path to my wife.
its struggles and turmoils ended—
horses so white they dazzle the sun,
a car of dazzling glory spun,
driver all fearless of peril.
from depth to height the race is run,
the equipage right royal.
the meet a queen come decked as a queen
in shining garments past satin,
with pearl-sewn tears to laughter changed
and heart-blood drops to jewels.
a thousand colours of rainbow light
the trophies of many a hard-won fight,
before pale faith was lost in sight
and eyes cease weeping on trial.
a driver find,
a purse well lined,
a gate and road all open.
and horses six,
to avoid the styx,
yet climb the invisible mountain.'

there now, brightcoat, what do you think of that? can you fathom it? i
think it's a very charming puzzle."

"who do you think wrote it?"

"why, the governor! and out of compliment to his wife i feel bound
somehow or other to—to endeavour to accomplish the task set me."

"horses so white they dazzle the sun, and six of them," said brightcoat
thoughtfully. "do you think you'll ever manage it?"

"i don't know. but there's no harm in trying." and she laughed again,
and was most becomingly dressed in no time.

then together, the frog taking its accustomed place upon her shoulder,
they descended the staircase.

in the hall miss crokerly and her brother stood talking, he in a thick
overcoat ready for going out.

rosalie approached and handed her letter to him, which he received
kindly, though with some surprise.

"i found it in my bag," said she, "and had no idea it was there. i think
you are sir john?"

"yes."

after he had read the letter enclosed, he handed it to his sister. she
read it with evident interest, then returned it to him, and holding out
her hand to the new-comer, said:

"we're very pleased to receive you, rosalie. and as long as you care to
stay with us you will be welcome, apart from any considerations except
those of friendship."

"i'm afraid i'm too poor to accept your hospitality for a longer time
than it takes me to find work."

"poor? the letter to my brother is from the wealthiest banker of our
acquaintance, the safest and surest. and his statement proves you
anything but poor."

then rosalie remembered the jewels she had found, and remained silent.
she had prized them very much and loved them, and now she understood
their value, in one of those flashes of perception that occasionally
comes to all of us.

after that sir john went away, and miss crokerly led the way into the
dining-room, where breakfast was laid for rosalie only, as the others
had long since had theirs.

and that day passed away as healthily and normally as rosalie could
wish, and a morning's shopping was quite a pleasant recreation to her,
and in fact the first of its kind she had ever indulged in in her life.

for to be dumb is a great drawback, as most of us can understand, and
curtails most pleasures, little or big.

and then for tea some very interesting people dropped in, or so rosalie
found them, and altogether the weary, dead, dull, lonely level of life
seemed to have vanished.

chapter xxiii
the scandal of the temple

now it chanced one night that miss crokerly wrote a letter after the bag
had gone to post, and rosalie, seeing that it was dry and frosty, had
offered to take it to the pillar-box, which was a few minutes' walk away
at the end of the next square. it was so pleasant out of doors that she
took the longest way, and having slipped the letter in the box, prepared
to take the same road back.

on turning a corner, her attention was attracted by someone coming
towards her, scarcely fifty yards away, reading a letter, so it seemed
to her, with apparently no more trouble than if it had been daylight.
but that fact, though it afterwards occurred to her, was forgotten in
the shock of recognising that here was mr. barringcourt.

rosalie stood still under the gas-lamp, unable to move, paralysed with
fear. an instinct of safety should have made her move along, but here
she stood, courting observation by standing directly in the path, with
big wide eyes fixed upon his face. just then he looked up with bent
brows and eyes. they came directly in contact with rosalie's white and
terrified face. in an instant his abstracted air vanished, and a very
present alertness took the place of his thoughts. like a flash of
lightning rosalie turned and sped the near way home, reaching the safety
of the doorstep in less than three minutes. she did not stop to breathe
till safe within the friendly shelter of the hall, where something told
her to regain a little composure, at any rate, before appearing before
miss crokerly. she went upstairs and removed her hat and the rich
evening wrap she had drawn round her, sat down for a little while to
recover her breath, and then descended to the drawing-room again.

miss crokerly, intent upon some fine needlework, did not look up on her
entrance; but rosalie had one friend whose eyes were sharper and
perceptions more acute. the frog, whom she had left sitting upon the
timepiece, looked across at her. rosalie gained assurance from that
glance.

she sat down without any remark, and took up the book she had been
reading, making some pretence of continuing her occupation as before.

"i've heard a rumour," said miss crokerly presently, "that the great
high priest is resigning."

"who is he?" asked rosalie absently.

"the great high priest of the serpent," continued miss crokerly. "i can
scarcely credit it, though. he is barely seventy-two. and he can have no
reason for it either. it's an office never vacated till death. dotage
doesn't count."

"maybe he is more conscientious than most," said rosalie, rousing
herself from her own line of thought to take an interest in the
conversation.

"i don't know, i'm sure. there have been whispers of it for the last
three years. i think he has enemies."

"i suppose all men in prominent positions have."

"yes; but there are enemies and enemies. now my opinion of the great
high priest is that he has hidden enemies, or perhaps he chances to be
merely unfortunate."

"what do you mean?" asked rosalie, beginning to be interested in the
conversation.

"well, it began with a scandal. a rumour got about that he had admitted
a woman to see the serpent, and some said such conduct was nothing short
of blasphemous. but that was either hushed up or contradicted.
contradicted, i think, and then hushed up."

"would it be such a terrible thing for a woman to see the serpent?"

miss crokerly smiled.

"well, there's a great deal of superstition and ignorance mixed up with
our religion, as all simple and right-minded people can see. but it
grows in suitable soil, so it's strong and holds well together."

"and did it not please the people that a woman had seen the serpent?"

"naturally not, after thousands of years of prejudice. some of the
best—by that i mean the _narrowest_—women i know withdrew their support
(they were extremely wealthy) from the temple for some months during the
scandal. they said they felt the brightness of the serpent had been
sullied."

"absurd!" said rosalie; and the blood began to course a little quicker
through her veins from indignation.

"well," said miss crokerly slowly, "one can't judge quickly. of course
you know the great high priest is not allowed to have a wife. she is
separated from him the day he takes up office, and if he did admit a
woman from idle curiosity to see the serpent—well, judged from one
point, it was very serious."

"maybe," said rosalie, whose tongue was itching to say much more. "but
do you think there was any truth in it?"

"well, yes. a woman's handkerchief with a red rose embroidered in the
corner was found upon the altar."

"never!" said rosalie, with such a visible jump and accents so sharp
that miss crokerly looked up, and the frog's eyes grew wide with
warning.

"it was so, indeed. my brother had it on good authority. one of the
golden priests went in that evening to offer the prayer at the new moon.
he found it there. and then this hushed-up scandal followed."

again rosalie was silent, why, she could scarcely tell. she recognised
the handkerchief, which in after events she had never missed. it was her
aunt's birthday gift, with a little silk-embroidered rose in the corner
instead of a name.

"but why did the golden priest remark upon it?" asked rosalie.

"that is what i say. and it is that which makes me think the great high
priest has enemies."

"but such a thing as that, once died down, could not make him resign."

"perhaps not. but i don't think it ever really did die down. and last
year at the ‘feast of white souls,' after the fast of black ones, as he
was coming out from between the curtains to sprinkle white confetti down
the temple aisles, a most unfortunate thing occurred. the crimson
curtain suddenly tore from the rings and fell, and there behind, to the
view of a mixed assembly, shone out the golden serpent. i was there
myself, having gone to hear the music, for on these occasions it is very
fine, and was sitting with my brother quite near to the choir stalls."

"and what did you do?"

"well, it was very strange, but we all instinctively did the same thing.
i took one real good look at the serpent (and i don't know any woman
there who didn't, except those who screamed, and some who fainted, for
what, it would be hard to tell), and then, from a sense of what was due
to the male part of the congregation, we covered our eyes with our
handkerchiefs, and all turning our backs upon the god we worshipped,
were led solemnly out, with comparatively little confusion. the service
could not continue, and that event has made him the most unpopular man
on lucifram."

"then," said rosalie, half laughing, half sarcastically, leaning back in
her chair, and looking at the fire, "i should say it would not be a bad
idea to introduce a ‘feast of handkerchiefs' to take the place of the
unfortunate white souls. a handkerchief betrayed one woman and saved the
rest. it should receive a place of honour in the temple."

"what a pity he did not take it in that way," said miss crokerly. "but
i've heard since that the occurrence has depressed him terribly. and the
last news is that he is resigning."

"and which of the golden priests was it who spread the first report?"

"his name is alphonso. i know him slightly, but do not care for him. i
think him ambitious, and unscrupulous, and narrow-minded. i cannot help
but think myself he is the greatest enemy the high priest has, though
there are some who uphold him as the strictest and highest principled
man within the church."

"i dislike him already," said rosalie impulsively.

the other laughed.

"well, you will have an opportunity of meeting him to-morrow night at
the sebberens'. he is unmarried, so you may be as charming as you like
to him, and no one's heart will break. but for all that he's greatly run
after by the women. they regard the golden priests and the great high
priest as demi-gods."

the golden priests were those whose rank came next to that of the great
high priest, and when this latter died his place was always filled from
this exclusive body of great men, the wealthiest and most powerful in
the church of lucifram.

"oh! that will make me dislike him all the more," said rosalie. "the men
who are run after by women, and the women who are run after by men, are
both equally detestable. i mean, of course, in excess."

"but that is fascination."

"i prefer the fascination that is clever enough to captivate its own
sex."

"well, men admire him in an intellectual capacity."

"a general favourite? most insipid!"

"really, rosalie!" said miss crokerly, and she laughed.

"you cannot expect me to love him. a man should always be loyal to his
superior."

"well, of course, i am only giving you my own opinion. and you must not
repeat it on any account; because it is not generally believed or
certain that he might be prompted by motives of ambition to make known
the incident of the handkerchief."

"i hope that if the high priest does resign someone less self-seeking
takes his place."

"than golden priest alphonso? but that is scarcely likely. he has mr.
barringcourt for his great friend, and—what is the matter, rosalie? your
cheeks are all aflame."

"oh! i—i—i've had springes of toothache all day, and the sudden pain
makes me flush. i'm all right now. what were you saying?"

"alphonso is sure to succeed to the high priestship sooner or later. he
has much influence on his side—the prime minister, and lord high all
superior for public and official friends, and mr. barringcourt, whom i
just mentioned, who has great influence in outside circles, and more
money apparently than even poor geoffrey todbrook had. now there's a man
for you to dislike cordially on the grounds of general favouritism. the
women idolise him, and men will hear no wrong of him."

"and what kind of a life does he lead? is he a good man?" asked rosalie,
leaning forward and looking across at her.

"i don't know. my brother thinks greatly of him, and so do i. but it's
hard to tell who's good and who's bad when you come to private life.
there are so many things for and against it."

"of course."

"still, i think as rich men go, who are young and unfettered by
anything, he must be fairly good. i don't remember ever hearing anything
against him. and i know he has carried out all geoffrey todbrook's
wishes with regard to charities to the letter."

"is he executor?"

"yes."

"then it would be surprising if he fell short of his duties, would it
not?"

"perhaps so. i expect he too will be at the sebberens' to-morrow night
but if you have any conversation with mr. barringcourt at all, you
cannot choose but like him."

"is his temper unfailingly pleasant, then?"

"no; it isn't altogether that. i have known him very absent and
off-hand. but i suppose people occasionally find that rather pleasant in
a world of suavity and insincerity."

"i don't agree with you. i'd rather have people unfailingly suave. it
spares a great deal of friction."

"what has upset you, rosalie? you are most argumentative to-night."

"i expect you are spoiling me, and i've never been accustomed to it. you
should treat me with stern severity, and you would find me improve
wonderfully."

"and you just preaching unfailing suavity."

"oh! i preach by the creed of contrary."

but rosalie's argumentative mood sprang really from the irritation that
followed on the evening's escapade.

in a cooler moment, and on reflection, she was not over and above proud
of the way in which she had fled so precipitately before the enemy. and
yet what was there to be done? to have stood still was to have hazarded,
so rosalie thought, far more than she had any intention of hazarding.
she registered a mental vow never to go out at night alone again, and
wished, oh! wished most intensely, that nothing had tempted her out that
night. in her own room the frog broke the silence by saying:

"you seem very upset to-night."

"yes. i—i met mr. barringcourt, and i ran away."

"what made you run?"

"i was frightened of him."

"what harm could he work you?"

"oh! he might have persuaded me in a moment of weakness i owed him a
debt of gratitude."

"and yet you have the kiss of freedom on your brow."

"yes; but like most abstract things, it sank before the concrete."

"you'll get over it by the morning. sleep upon it."

"i should have had you with me. you have far less fear than i. the
farther off the episodes of marble house become the more i dread them.
they seemed all right, and yet they were all wrong."

"miss crokerly said you would probably meet mr. barringcourt to-morrow
night."

"yes, i know. and it was only this morning i congratulated myself he was
not in her set, and that i should never be likely to meet him."

"if you meet mr. barringcourt to-morrow night, you won't run away—will
you?"

"no; because it will be light, and there will be people about, and i
shall have you. no, i won't run away in any case. but you will come with
me?"

"of course! i should have very much enjoyed the fresh air to-night; but
you did not invite me."

"i'm sorry. but i've paid the penalty of my negligence; from henceforth
you must never leave me."

"what dress do you intend to wear to-morrow night?"

"the one i have worn all along."

"it's as shabby as if you'd been digging in it. but the morning may
bring you another."

"i hope it may not be very heavy, in case i should have to depend on my
heels again."

chapter xxiv
at the sebberens'

the sebberens were people who indulged greatly in private theatricals
and other sorts of entertainment. with the amateur they included the
professional, and in between the acts, songs and recitations were
contributed by the latter.

mr. sebberen had been engaged in pork, and had made enough money thereby
to make the pig respected—as an investment, anyway. he married a
waitress in a restaurant, who was neither more nor less charming and
handsome than most of her class. she had ambitions, and was young.

but for ten long years they had no children, and never a scrap of the
pig was wasted. and those ten years were years of increase. then to put
spirit to an ambition somewhat sordid, a little daughter was born. both
parents were beside themselves with joy. it is not everyone who can
manage so much, after breeding nothing but gold or pork, and so they
felt. it's a common thing to be a mother after a lapse of one year, but
after ten! they grew proud on the strength of it.

and another ten years had trebled the ample fortune, nay, more than
trebled it, and mr. sebberen, a comparatively young man—scarce
forty—found himself with a daughter only ten years old.

another decade saw her twenty, he in the prime of life, her mother too.
"sebberen's pork" was of world-wide fame. the king and the chief prince
had it on their breakfast tables; the poor still bought the sausages,
and doctors still evinced a weakness for onions, milk, and tripe.

no one would have known, to walk into this grand house, that its
occupants once lived behind a little pork shop. for susiebelle was
handsome and clever, and had taught her mother a thing or two, and made
great friends at school, not from any particular virtue, but from the
glamour of outside show. she had a great deal of the outward semblance
of that inward spirit that had made her father what he was. she was
shallow and brilliant, and a perfect mimic of the world.

when the world wept, she wept. they called her tender-hearted.

when it laughed, she also laughed. they called her gay.

when in a mood for admiration, she, too, had time for adulation, admired
arts and music, knotted her pretty brows at science, and bought rich
copies of all the works of fashionable poets. and what was all this for?

susiebelle at twenty made up her mind to marry, and marry as well as
could be. her father had just had a tremendous stroke of luck in
business. she set her mind upon a duke, shooting high to reach as far as
fortune favoured.

one year had passed away, and susiebelle's ambition has not yet been
granted. a poor baronet, an insipid, weak-eyed lord; not bad for a
beginning, certainly.

and this brings us to to-night, the amateur theatricals, and gay
company.

sir john was under commission to paint the lovely susiebelle, and had
undertaken it with a fine courtesy that made her mother glow with pride
to think the great were servants of the—the small. and sir john would do
it successfully after all, for she was pretty enough to appeal to the
sense of beauty in any artist, and her parents were over and above
willing to pay.

and that is why sir john went to the party—from motives of
conscientiousness. and miss crokerly went because she wished to give
pleasure to rosalie. she, an ideal chaperon and friend. and rosalie went
because there was no way out of it.

but rosalie's dress was in itself that night a thing of beauty. green,
as bright and dazzling a green as the frog's coat, that fitted to her
graceful figure as perfectly as the shining scales of a serpent's coils,
worked with tiny seed jewels and edgings of gold.

"you look just like the mermaid," said the frog, "your hair is so pale,
and your eyes so bright, and your skin so fair, and your lips are as red
as coral."

and rosalie looked in the glass just as once before when comparing
herself with mariana, and laughed again just as then, and clasped her
hands.

then, when she was ready, she went to miss crokerly's room, who, on
seeing her, uttered an exclamation of surprise.

"what is the matter?" asked rosalie.

"i believe your frog is a beautifier. take care no one steals it in the
crush to-night. or perhaps i ought to take the credit to myself. i think
i shall. you have improved in appearance since coming here, rosalie, and
to-night you look quite radiant."

"thank you," and with a sudden touch of impulsiveness rosalie kissed
her. "you are so kind to me that the credit is yours."

when they reached the sebberens' the large party was assembling in the
great drawing-room, which had been changed into a theatre for the
occasion. supper was to follow, but light refreshments were being handed
round, and proved very useful to take the chill off the commencement, as
it were. and music not too obtrusive helped digestion. rosalie's heart
beat quicker as they entered the brilliantly-lit room, advance and
retreat covered by miss crokerly and her brother, before and behind.

just inside the wide doors stood mrs. sebberen talking to a grey-haired
man; susiebelle was busy behind the curtain, so could not be in
attendance upon the guests.

she greeted miss crokerly effusively, stared, as is perfectly compatible
with good manners, at rosalie from head to foot, became effusive to her,
and then bestowed the same greeting upon sir john. there was no doubt
about it, she was a happy and genial woman. she evidently considered
them among her guests of honour or chief friendship, for in person she
conducted them to a line of seats near to the front. she was dressed in
rich black satin, and looked handsome enough to be imposing.

on the way she talked much to miss crokerly, but looked much at rosalie,
her dress, her face, the curious little animal upon her shoulder.

beyond a certain interest, rosalie read nothing in her glance. then when
they were seated, she passed away again, and rosalie found time to look
around. everything and everybody were very brilliant. and she recognised
some of her new acquaintances, but none more intimate. at last she
whispered to miss crokerly—sir john had left them for the moment:

"where is the golden priest alphonso?"

miss crokerly's sharp eyes travelled round the assembly.

"he is not here yet," said she. "of course i don't know, but i expect
that he will come. there is lady flamington and her husband. is she not
beautiful? but very sad-looking."

"lady flamington—lady flamington! oh! where is she?" said rosalie, in an
eager voice.

but just then the lady spoken of, who was sitting some distance to the
right a row in front, turned round, and seeing miss crokerly, rose and
came toward her. her smile was very pleasant.

"i am deserting my husband for better company," said she. "i dragged him
here against his will, low be it spoken, and am paying the penalty in
sulks. your brother is easier to manage, miss crokerly."

"the privilege of management is not mine. i am only his sister."

the other shook her head.

"you are too modest. there was never a man yet who governed himself; he
couldn't manage it. it ends in sudden death or corpulency. both are
dreadful things."

miss crokerly laughed.

"you will perhaps have heard what heavy responsibilities i have taken
upon myself lately."

"yes; i hear you have turned chaperon," and lady flamington looked
across at rosalie and smiled as pleasantly as before.

miss crokerly introduced them.

"are you fond of private theatricals?" she asked.

"i've never been to any," replied rosalie candidly.

"she was an only child, and brought up very strictly," said miss
crokerly, at which lady flamington said "oh!" and looked toward the
door.

she remained sitting by them till the play began, talking with both of
them. at last she said to rosalie:

"do you know, i have the oddest sensation that i have met you before."

"i don't think so," said rosalie. "i have a very good memory for faces,
and i have never seen you anywhere."

"perhaps i am mistaken. people often resemble each other so curiously."

but now silence was imposed. the play had begun in earnest, and it was
quite interesting enough to retain the attention. when the act was over,
a song by a very well-known singer was announced; but before this came
off a few late arrivals made their entrance.

"there is the golden priest," said miss crokerly.

he came in with two more gentleman. he was tall and thin, with a narrow
face and black hair. his eyes were deeply set and fixed close together.
his nose was long, and his lips very thin and straight. he looked
clever; beyond that he was scarcely prepossessing, but he was evidently
made much of in that assembly. they gave him a seat upon the very first
row. and yet he never ceased to preach that the pig was unclean! it was
a canon of the church.

the play had more fine dresses in it than cleverness or substance, but
it was received as warmly as the more deserving performances during the
interludes.

everybody was in high good-humour apparently, and the next day the paper
said it was the most successful entertainment and supper party mrs.
sebberen had ever given, which, coming from such good authority, must
have been the truth.

when the temporary curtain had fallen for the last time upon general and
good-natured applause, a movement was made toward the supper-room.

they put a little round-headed man with weak eyes to look after rosalie.
he blinked upon her critically, and then smiled. rosalie did not like
him.

however, not being dumb now, she needs must talk to him; never had
anyone been more tongue-tied. the coldness of the weather, their only
conversation, scarcely matched her conduct to him. the supper-room was
brilliant; nothing had been spared that money could buy to please the
eye or taste. he forgot her in the contemplation of his food, and she
was glad; it gave her time to look about.

the table was long, and everyone apparently was seated at it. there was
not a plain-looking woman among the number, so it seemed to her; and
many of them were really beautiful. but lady flamington possessed a
certain individual grace, a coldness and sadness under her exterior
charm of manner, that raised her much above the ordinary plane. sir john
was sitting by her, and they were talking pleasantly to one another. she
gave one the impression that she could be very fascinating.

but as rosalie's eyes travelled up the table on the opposite side, she
recognised mr. barringcourt for the first time that evening, and he was
sitting next to susiebelle.

susiebelle was evidently in good feather, for everyone had been
congratulating her upon her acting, and she was simple-minded enough to
believe them, which gave her quite a charm. she was talking to him with
great spirit and gaiety, and looked quite handsome enough to make any
mother proud. mr. barringcourt was listening so politely that his
attention seemed to lack interest. when she laughed he smiled; when she
smiled he listened gravely; when her face was serious, as it rarely was,
he took the opportunity to look around.

on one of those occasions his eye travelled across to where rosalie sat.
no sign of recognition was visible in them, but a little later he looked
at her again.

rosalie was annoyed to find that both times she had been looking at him,
and for the future looked discreetly the other way, nay, cultivated the
acquaintance of her companion, and found him scarcely as uninteresting
as at first she had imagined.

but at last the evening was over, and she standing by miss crokerly in
the hall, waiting for their carriage.

the coldness of the day had changed to snow, and the ground outside was
white; a sight which somehow or other always surprises people when first
they see it, however much they may have expected it. thick white flakes
were still falling rapidly. people drew their wraps round them and
shivered, or pretended to.

lady flamington's carriage drove away as miss crokerly and rosalie
reached the top step. mr. barringcourt had seen them off, and closed the
carriage door. before moving away himself, he looked up at the steps and
saw these two descending. he raised his hat, looking at miss crokerly.

"sir john is not returning home with you?"

"no," she answered anxiously. "he said he preferred to walk; but i'm
sure he can have no idea of the state of the night. i have not seen him
since before supper-time."

"i'll seek him out and bring him to you; it's a beastly night." and he
ran lightly up the steps, whilst they got as quickly under cover as
possible.

he was not long away, and returned, bringing sir john along with him.

"you surely are not walking yourself?" said miss crokerly, as he
proceeded to close the door for them also.

"yes. it never occurred to me to order a carriage, and i have neither
wife nor sister to be concerned about my getting wet."

"then," said she decidedly, "you must come with us. i noticed as you
went up the steps your shoes are not at all suitable to the night."

it seemed almost as if he would decline, then suddenly he said "thank
you," and stepped in beside sir john, and they were off.

now, the frog was so bright that the carriage was quite pleasantly lit,
for it had crept out from beneath rosalie's wraps to its accustomed
place.

miss crokerly then introduced him to rosalie; but as he showed no signs
of recognition, neither did she, but leant back in her corner and
listened to the conversation.

"what did you think of the theatricals?" asked miss crokerly.

"i did not arrive in time for them. the secretary of todbrook's home for
deaf and dumb came to see me about a christmas treat for them. for
myself, i can imagine no treat that would appeal to incurables. but he
has faith in turkey, and i think he said plum-pudding."

"it must be a terrible thing to be afflicted with either defect. what
else are you going to do for them?"

"i don't know, i'm sure. i said i'd call to see him in the morning."

"oh! you should have a christmas tree, and a cinematograph, and take
them all to the pantomime to see the transformation scenes," said
rosalie.

and she sat up again, and her eyes were very big and bright, because the
subject was especially interesting to her. the other three looked at
her.

"are you a philanthropist?" asked mr. barringcourt, with a vein of
coldness running in his words, in direct opposition to her heat.

she laughed.

"no; but i was told you were," and leant back in her seat, and evidently
felt safe enough to betray no outward fear.

"i was speaking last night about your exertions on behalf of the deaf
and dumb," said miss crokerly, in explanation, recognising, without
understanding it, the tone in each of their voices.

"you were naturally prepossessed in my favour then," and he looked at
rosalie again, speaking in a voice not free from sarcasm.

"no. i simply recognised that you were doing your duty."

"which you must admit is the hardest of all things."

"i take your word for it. from to-day i honour you as a martyr. i was
not prepossessed in your favour at all. forgive me for my stupidity."

rosalie's voice was changed from hot to cold. miss crokerly heard it
with surprise, and a silence must have fallen had not sir john, whose
mind ranged on different topics, put in suddenly:

"i hear that it is quite true the great high priest intends to resign
office."

"i have heard the same thing," said mr. barringcourt. "it is a very
unusual occurrence."

"did you hear the reason of it?" asked sir john.

"i believe it has something to do with the feast of white souls. the
episode was rather unfortunate. a great many are in favour of his
resignation."

"might i ask your opinion?" said sir john.

"yes. i think the great high priest should be above scandal, and he is
evidently not."

and he looked at rosalie, and his eyes were laughing, though his face
and voice were as serious as those of a judge.

the old distaste rose in her, as of some dumb thing against a cruel and
powerful oppressor. but she said:

"do you indulge in scandal, mr. barringcourt? i thought it was the
recreation of idle women."

"oh, no," he answered, with the coolness of rudeness. "idle women in
these parts are known by the sharpness of their tongues."

"i'm very sorry," she answered, suddenly changing in tone and manner,
"but i can't help liking the great high priest; and as for golden priest
alphonso—i detest him."

"oh, dear! dear!" said miss crokerly, with agitation, laying her hand on
rosalie's knee. "you must not talk like that, rosalie, indeed, you must
not. it is not usual. remember he is mr. barringcourt's friend, and
bears an excellent reputation."

but as the carriage drew up, she stopped speaking of necessity.

"you will drive on, will you not?" asked sir john.

"no, thank you. i'll get out, and borrow whatever miss crokerly cares to
lend me. i never had a cold in my life. the experience would be new to
me."

so he came with them into the house, and seemed in no particular hurry
to depart. rosalie said to him:

"will you do me a favour, mr. barringcourt?"

"to the best of my ability."

"then give me one good point in the character of your friend."

"which friend?"

"the golden priest."

"he is a man of great integrity."

"what's that?"

"honour."

"what's that?"

rosalie's questions were not contemptuous; they were put with a great
desire to find out.

he shrugged his shoulders.

"there you have me," he answered. "i'm sure i don't know. the word
generally speaks for itself to all but the ignorant."

"then you cannot defend him on the strength of it?"

"no; he is clever enough to defend himself, i hope. you are wearing a
very pretty and uncommon ornament, miss paleaf."

"it is not an ornament. it is alive, and one of my dearest friends."

"such a friend is rather questionable on lucifram."

"why?"

"the serpent has a weakness for frogs. in a natural state they form part
of its food."

"my friend has powers of self-defence as well as yours."

"the serpent has a very big mouth."

"yes. and is ambitious enough to prefer men to frogs upon occasion."

he laughed, and the conversation changed to general topics.

chapter xxv
the golden priest

that night when she and the frog were alone together, rosalie began the
conversation by saying:

"what do you think of mr. barringcourt?"

"i like him," said the frog, quite shortly.

"what has prepossessed you?"

"nothing particularly. but i like him. i'm sorry you were so rude to
him."

rosalie flushed. the tone was almost grave enough for a rebuke.

"i? rude? oh, brightcoat, how can you say so? i always try to be polite
to him, and it always ends in failure. it is he who is rude to me."

"no," said the frog; "you take no pains to act or to speak sensibly. and
to say you detest anyone is absurd, ridiculous, to say nothing of bad
manners."

"you've never lived in marble house, so you can afford to talk. talk
about vivisection! it was mr. barringcourt who openly deplored to me
there was no such thing in our country. what do you think of that?"

"there are worse things than vivisection," replied the frog. "if it were
not for that i should never have been here, or alive now."

"but—" said rosalie, staring at it.

"why don't you cultivate a charming manner, rosalie?"

"i expect i'm not made that way. are my manners so uncouth?" and her
expression was doleful.

"no; but i don't see how you're to get your six horses, chariot, and all
the rest, unless you try to be more charming."

"well, mr. barringcourt will never help me that way. you should have
seen the look he gave me last night, and then to-night, as if he'd never
seen me before. such folk give me quite a creepy feeling. besides,
talking about horses, his are black. can't you see he is the exact
opposite of what i want? he would do all he could to hinder me. if it
were not that once i saw him looking very tired i should detest him too.
oh, how i hate lucifram! somehow or other, i never feel at home here,"
and she sighed.

"and you've got about all it can give you."

"then i'm like all the rest—ungrateful."

"rosalie, has it ever struck you you are very pretty?"

"yes; every now and again it has. but what of that? all the women we saw
to-night were pretty. it's the commonest of all things. if i'd a big
hook nose now i might appear imposing. but no; even that is common
enough to-day."

after a pause the frog said: "i heard someone say to-night you were the
prettiest woman there."

"please, don't! i'd so much rather you left my personal appearance
alone."

but the frog continued:

"it's as well for people to think about these things at times. i know
many a lovely woman who has been ruined by thinking too much of her
beauty in one way, and too little in another. they know they are
beautiful, and that knowledge is all-sufficient to them; their food and
recreation, and all in all."

"but i'm not one of those."

"no. i think you might put yours to much more use than you do."

"you speak in puzzles."

"you are not so dull but that with a little consideration you will
understand me."

so rosalie went to bed much sat on by the frog, but maybe profiting, as
most of us do, from a little compression and criticism.

next day everything was sloppy, wet, and dismal. rain began to fall in
the afternoon, and going out, no matter of pleasure on such a day, was
not indulged in.

tea had just been brought in, and rosalie and miss crokerly were
preparing to enjoy it alone, when visitors were announced. they were mr.
barringcourt and the golden priest alphonso.

"i came to return the umbrella, miss crokerly, and met the golden priest
on my way."

"then you will have tea," said she. "on a wet day you are doubly
welcome. no one else has ventured out."

"we are fortunate. miss paleaf, allow me to introduce my friend, golden
priest alphonso, to you."

and rosalie, having a severe and cold critic perched upon her shoulder,
rose very gracefully and bowed.

"it must have been very important business that brought you out on such
a day," said she to him, as they sat down, with charming sympathy.

"well, i was out begging, and a beggar cannot choose his weather. i was
going in search of mr. barringcourt for a subscription for a new
decorative curtain for the temple."

"in place of the old red one?"

"exactly. it was old and shabby, despite its richness, and we think it
must be rotten. there is every indication that it may give way again,
and so we are making all speed with the new one."

"then you are not superstitious enough to think it gave way before from
anything but natural causes?"

he looked at her sharply and narrowly.

"oh, no," he answered. "one can find a natural cause for everything.
therein lies the greater miracle."

"but how?" said rosalie, subduing her tongue in deferential attention to
the pillar of the church.

he smiled, as became one of exalted intellect.

"well, there is nothing like order—cause and effect—to work a lasting
miracle. a startling thing has a short life. the rottenness of the
curtain was the symbol of something still more rotten. nothing takes
place in a day."

rosalie's eyes opened innocently, though they were very far from
innocent. there is no doubt the frog must have been to blame for it.

"what is still more rotten? but perhaps my questions bore you. i am so
inquisitive."

again he smiled.

"you could never be that. but what is still more rotten is the system
that lets old men continue in office after they have proved themselves
unfit for it."

rosalie's eyes betrayed a charming depth of horror at this cold-blooded
statement.

"but, sir," said she, "who is to be the judge of their incapacity? and,
again, it seems so cruel, and—and—doesn't it make a terrible lot of
enemies for you, saying things like that?"

the golden priest laughed. the last remark evidently was to some point.

"in the cause of common sense one has no objection to making enemies.
and i cannot for the life of me see why the highest position in the land
should never be filled by a man till he's nearly in his dotage."

"oh! it's more restful. besides, a great and a good man should retain
his intellect to his death, however old and feeble he may be."

"granted! but feebleness is no qualification for an important post. and
greatness and goodness should discern its own capacity."

"is it true, then, that the great high priest is resigning?"

"yes; in a few months."

"he has discernment, then?"

"i think his action is a little too late for that. his plea is
ill-health. none of us have heard anything further—not those nearest to
him in office."

"and then there will come the general election for his successor?"

(for in lucifram they chose their highest priests that way. the clergy
vote for them.)

"yes; in a few weeks from now."

"it will be a very distracting time?"

"scarcely more so than the last year has been."

and so the silent plot of years had worked to a fulfilment, the veil or
mask at length being thrown aside. to-day was spoken openly what a month
ago had been whispered and kept down.

here the conversation was interrupted by miss crokerly.

"mr. barringcourt tells me he saw the secretary again this morning, and
arranged for all the things you suggested, rosalie."

"yes. he has never doubted my judgment before, but i think he must have
detected a foreign influence, he looked so dubious."

rosalie laughed.

"are they to have force-meat and sausages with the turkey, do you know?"
she asked.

"it never occurred to me to ask."

"and you an executor of a will! and never to inquire about the gravy and
bread-sauce. it's plain you don't attach enough importance to a
christmas dinner. but if i were you, mr. barringcourt, i'd countermand
all orders, and give them 3s. 6d. each, and a free day to enjoy
themselves anywhere and anyhow, with a night each end, to make a
complete sandwich and a delightful holiday."

"you imagine them to be prisoners. on the contrary, those who have
friends or relations who care to receive them may have leave from the
home once every month. and for the inmates, you must remember it is no
prison that they live in, and they are very happy."

"i suppose so," said rosalie. "but i always dread those public
institutions for defects."

"you are prejudiced," put in the golden priest. "they are the greatest
blessings in existence. i always regard them as branches of the temple."

"so do i," said mr. barringcourt; but the tone was questionable.

"i have the greatest longing to go through todbrook's home," said miss
crokerly. "one hears so much about it. i should like to see the inmates
at work."

rosalie shivered.

"oh! would you, miss crokerly? i can imagine nothing more galling to
them than to be watched by strangers."

"but is it such an infliction to them?" asked that lady, turning to mr.
barringcourt.

"i don't know, i'm sure," said he. "i hardly think so. i think myself it
would be better if they had more visitors from the outside world. lady
flamington is the only lady i have ever taken over the premises."

"i had just left there," said the golden priest, "before i met you
to-day. i hear she caught a severe chill last night, and is confined to
her room."

"indeed," said miss crokerly; and mr. barringcourt and rosalie looked at
each other, from no apparent motive.

when tea was over the two gentlemen rose to go.

"i think," said mr. barringcourt, in a lower voice, to rosalie, as the
others were speaking of a special fern which both were rearing—"i think
it would not be a bad plan for you to go over the home with miss
crokerly. the matron will willingly take you over, and you'll find there
are worse things in the world than being deaf and dumb, or even blind."

then somehow or other they looked at each other, the first time really
since the saturday night. how long ago it seemed now! and each was very
curious about the other evidently, for rosalie's eyes searched his, and
his eyes hers, but what conclusion either came to it would be hard to
say.

and then she shook hands with the golden priest, and the door closed.

"do you think," said miss crokerly, "that mr. barringcourt told the
golden priest your opinion of him, and brought him here to-day in
consequence?"

"no, i don't think so," she replied thoughtfully. "i think mr.
barringcourt must have recognised the golden priest has no sense of
humour, and would resent instead of forgiving opinions."

"your tone proves appearances are deceptive. i thought by your manner
you had changed your estimate of him."

rosalie half shuddered, and stretched her hands to the blaze.

"i was simply carrying out a lesson in obedience. and yet my estimate of
him _has_ changed. i find him so uninteresting."

"it is the common lot of most of us to be uninteresting."

"oh, no, indeed. you are interesting; so is sir john; so was—was—so have
been many people i have met—mr. barringcourt, for instance. but this man
is petrified by ambition. it is eating up his heart and head."

"well, i am not particularly fond of him myself, as i have told you.
still, i am surprised that with your views you should find mr.
barringcourt interesting."

rosalie's brows knitted.

"i don't understand him. i never did understand him. have you ever met
anyone, miss crokerly, who at times struck you as being very, very good,
and at others almost cruel? and that is how he appears to me."

"but you know so little of him."

"yes, of course. i forgot. i spoke as if we were almost old
acquaintances."

chapter xxvi
conversation and a little pig-stuff

after that a short time passed away, during which rosalie saw much of
mr. barringcourt and the golden priest, though not intimately.

during this time lady flamington, young, beautiful, much courted and
admired, died. it caused a great sensation at the time, because she had
only been ill a week, and the doctor had great hopes of recovery because
she was strong. but it was double pneumonia, and whereas many a poor
person less well attended to gets well and strong again, she, with all
attention, passed away.

rosalie, though knowing comparatively little of her, was somehow much
affected by her death. sir john went to the funeral, and she was put
away in a manner that would have done many a poor person's heart good.

the next morning was bright and frosty, and rosalie took an early walk
in the park. walking there, she met mr. barringcourt, and as it was
daylight, and the frog was with her, she did not beat a retreat. she
expected to find him doleful, searched his face for the usual signs, but
found nothing. she remembered mariana's words, and thought there must be
truth in them.

"you are out early," he said.

"yes. i left miss crokerly feeding the birds and cleaning the cages. she
prefers to do it alone, so i don't offer to help her."

"you are happier with her than you were with me."

"of course. i was not at all happy with you, mr. barringcourt. you knew
it."

"i don't think you waited long enough to find out."

"i escaped by the first open door, in case none other should present
itself."

"which door was that?"

"that is my little secret. you must be as charming as charming to me,
and i will be sure never to let you know."

he laughed. "mariana again?"

"yes, mariana," said rosalie, suddenly standing still and looking up at
him, for they had walked along together. "how is mariana? i want to see
her again."

"oh, she is perfectly well, i think," he answered. "but you cannot see
her. the guest of sir john crokerly cannot fraternise with a housemaid."

"when did you find me a snob?" asked rosalie. "of course i can see her.
i—i should have written and asked her to call and see me, only things in
your house aren't quite on the highest principle."

and rosalie's nose went one degree higher, and she drew her skirts more
severely round her, and moved quite half an inch further away as they
walked along.

"what do you mean?"

"well, the postman would do his part of the work, but i doubt whether
everard would."

"then, if you don't trust everard, why not call yourself?"

rosalie's eyes opened.

"do you mean to say if i wouldn't trust a letter i should trust myself?
how you reason, mr. barringcourt."

"you could neither be torn up nor burned."

"no. but it is my firm intention never to enter marble house again."

"you are the young lady who once said you never had run away, and never
intended to."

her ears began to burn.

"to recall things that are past is mean—and—and abominable."

"i am not recalling things. i merely wish to point out to you people
always do the things they say they won't do."

"do they?" she answered, and turned a pair of mermaid eyes on to his
profile, and tried to recall things that he had said.

under the scrutiny he turned his face to her again, laughing.

"still the old trick of staring, rosalie."

"you must be very careful how you speak to me. see, i carry my chaperon
in my muff," and she tilted it up and showed the frog sitting there.

"if you had lived two hundred years ago, they'd have called that little
animal your familiar spirit, and burnt you as a witch. where did you get
it from?"

"another secret, mr. barringcourt. you must be still more charming, and
i'll count twenty every time before i speak. but when may i see
mariana?"

"mariana has forgotten you."

"has she married everard, then?"

"oh, no! their friendship is as pleasant as iced milk in summer. if you
want to see mariana, you must come and seek her."

rosalie bit her lip. "i've told you i won't."

"why?"

"because if i came you'd never let me out again."

"you say so, so i should be very ill-mannered if i contradicted you. my
road lies this way. good morning!"

"mr. barringcourt."

"yes," and he turned to find her standing there, with a puzzled and
anxious look on her face.

"would you mind giving me a little advice—telling me what to do, i
mean?"

"about what?"

"it's about a handkerchief that was found in the temple, so it seems,
some time ago. it belonged to me. i keep wondering ought i to tell, and
i don't want to. i would have asked miss crokerly, only she knows
nothing about it, and might not understand. what would you do if you
were me?"

"i'd worry; but being myself, i'd let it pass."

"but it caused a scandal, and did the great high priest a great deal of
harm."

"why did you not speak about it at the time?"

"because i wasn't in lucifram. i—i—i—you see, i haven't got out of my
old habit."

"no," he answered, and raised his hat and turned away again, and spoke
with such a short kind of pride, that just the one sharp monosyllable
was almost more than rosalie could stand.

"there now," said she to the frog, as they walked home, she with a
burning heart. "do you like him now? did i not tell you no one could be
nastier?"

"well," replied brightcoat, "you ask advice, and only give half the
information—not that."

"i see you have conspired against me. if i told him the story of the
governor, and how i met with you, he would only laugh and say i was
dreaming."

"you shouldn't stammer when you're speaking. people always misconstrue
it, and give it more meaning than it has."

"because people are so stupid. well, we've quarrelled again now, and you
can blame me if you like; but i blame him. and i would so love to see
mariana again. and to think he called her a housemaid! housemaid? i've
seen no woman to compare to her in beauty or grace since i came here.
the only thing she needed was life. and housemaids, as a rule, have too
much of that."

it is sad to relate that a few days after this the great high priest
died, and his death was a general relief. he was little mourned for. the
public do not always forgive a man readily, even when he has the grace
to die, though it's certainly a great point in his favour. but still
there was a certain section still in his favour, or rather, in favour of
a certain golden priest called phillipus, who was the oldest of that
superior gathering, and likeliest, therefore, to come soonest upon
dotage. now phillipus, if seniority had anything to do with it, ought to
have stepped into the vacant throne, and would have done, if the events
of the last two years or so had not undermined public feeling.

he was a man of sixty, so well preserved, and of an intellect so keen,
he appeared as one in the very middle youth of life. but when events are
against a man, he may be what he will, he doesn't make much headway,
from a worldly point of view.

but the death of the high priest, so unexpected as it was, threw things
forward a bit. the election for his successor must come off sooner than
was expected. in lieu of this, a famous conclave was called together at
a dinner-party—a party at which the dinner was not to be so important as
the speeches to follow.

whilst this was in progress of preparation, cards of invitation were
issued for a great ball in marble house on christmas day.

and so it was the day before the big dinner came off, and about a week
after the invitations for the ball had been issued, susiebelle rushed
into the drawing-room of her great friend, miss groggerton.

now, before proceeding, it may be as well to introduce this lady
cautiously. she lived in lucifram, not upon earth. she was so shockingly
and vulgarly outspoken that on our modest sphere she would never have
been tolerated; but there she was.

and why? well, the reason is a good one. she had twice been crossed in
love. that on earth makes a woman bitter. not so on lucifram.

crossed once, she does become embittered; crossed twice, she becomes a
scourge in the land. and miss groggerton had been crossed twice.

she therefore spared no one, man, woman, or child, and in consequence
all persons with a spite against anyone went to her. she poured pepper
and vinegar upon their wounds; then salt, and healed them.

so it was that susiebelle rushed into her room, furnished in yellow
satin.

"i think it's shameful!"

"what's shameful?" asked miss groggerton, laying down her yellow-backed
novel.

"the way camille barringcourt has behaved!"

"i knew you'd never manage it," said the other.

"manage what?"

"to get him up to the scratch."

"you've failed often enough; you needn't talk to me.

"i was talking to myself."

"it's scandalous the way that grey-haired old agnes crokerly gets into
everything. the reason her brother's never got married is because she
never lets him out of her sight."

"the reason he's never got married," said miss groggerton, "is because
he's no morals."

"you know a good bit about people," said susiebelle, more respectfully.

"i should think i did! people are no better than pigs; they're swine."

"pa made his money out of pigs."

"they're one degree better than people, then."

"i wish you'd let me say what i came to say."

"go on. no one's hindering you but yourself."

"camille barringcourt's a pig. he's gone and asked old agnes crokerly to
play hostess at his big do. and i thought now lady flamington was gone
there'd be a chance for ma and me."

"what d'ye want with _him_?" said the other sneeringly. "he's not a
duke. he's plain mr.! bless me, you're coming down!"

"ah! but he's got a mint of money."

"you've got enough money for two and more, if need be. what you want is
a title. if you looked back into his people you'd find they kept a chip
potato shop, i dare be bound."

"never!" said susiebelle, with emphasis, the tears rising in her eyes.
"he's so real a gentleman he makes lord hysquint look like a
twopence-halfpenny waiter in a restaurant i don't want a duke" (her
voice was rising), "i won't have a duke! they're common little sniggling
things that are too proud for their place. one might think they'd never
tasted sausage! i'll marry who i want to, and if i don't marry who i
want, i'll make everybody's life a burden to them!"

and her voice rose to a high pitch, for she was hysterical, and had
never been much crossed in her life before.

miss groggerton was enjoying the oratory so much, she made no attempt at
interruption. this would be a delightful tale for repetition.
susiebelle, once having begun to speak, had lost control over her
tongue, a state with which many will readily sympathise.

"i went to the temple specially when lady flamington died, and thanked
the serpent, because i thought it was my turn next, and—and—and now it's
old agnes crokerly—old cat!"

"old agnes crokerly!" said miss groggerton, with a snort and a sneer.
"old agnes crokerly!"

"well, he's asked her to do the thing for him. and he giving a big
affair with lady flamington warm in her coffin yet! and never a crape
band round his arm or his hat for her."

"well! women who make themselves too cheap can't expect to be respected
even in their graves."

"she never made herself too cheap. ma fought tooth and nail to get her
to our place, and wouldn't have managed it then if it hadn't been for
mr. barringcourt, who's more democratic in his views. he brought her to
a charity concert when her husband was away in the land of big boasts
and loud voices, and ma improved the occasion."

"and now," said the other contemptuously, "you say john crokerly's
sister has taken her place."

"yes; it's the way with young men. mollycoddled by women old enough to
be their mothers."

her tears began to flow again.

"he's not so very young," said miss groggerton impressively. "and you
bet your bottom dollar it's the other one he's after."

"which other?" and susiebelle opened her big brown eyes.

"what's her name? pa—pa—paleaf."

"what!" screamed the other. "the girl with the pug-nose, the green eyes
and washed-out hair. sprung from nowhere! a lot you know about it."

"i know plenty, because i watch. didn't i see them walking in the park
the other morning? i'll do him the justice, though, to say she kept
calling him back when he was all for getting away."

"i don't believe it. she knows how to dress, and there's an end of it."

"she's a right-down pretty woman," said miss groggerton spitefully, who
would have been just as eager to pronounce her ugly upon another
occasion.

"there's no dash, no ‘go' about her. she gives one the impression she's
been sleeping in a bandbox. i'd rather have agnes for company than her."

"you would. but then you're not a man. it makes all the difference."

and then susiebelle, being quite overwrought, put her head on the sofa
pillow and cried aloud. truly miss groggerton was cruel. but it was not
her nature to remain so long, if justice must be done her. suddenly she
said:

"are you very gone on barringcourt?"

"dead gone. if i don't marry him i'll marry no one. so pa had better
look out."

"well, it's miss paleaf he's gone upon now, though it may be only a
passing fancy. but why not set yourself to work to do her out?"

"how?" asked susiebelle, raising her head.

"well, she never goes anywhere but what she takes a hideous green toad
with her. these are days of extreme religion. let's say she worships it.
there would be scandal in no time, and it might end seriously for her."

"yes; but i'm thinking of him. i don't think he's a very religious man.
it might make no difference to him if he's f—f—fond of her."

miss groggerton laughed aloud.

"you'll never get married if you're such a greenhorn. d'ye think any man
would care for a girl who worshipped a toad when he was there himself to
be worshipped? on my word, susiebelle, you don't know everything."

"of course not," said the other humbly. "how—how shall we begin?"

"oh! i have a great friend, a priest called james peter. i'll speak of
it to him as a serious matter and scandal. there's no one like the
priests for spreading gossip."

chapter xxvii
after-dinner speeches

after that susiebelle went back to her accustomed life, and behaved as a
young lady who had been presented to the emperor _should_ behave.

the great night of the dinner had arrived; the following day was to be
the great election, and the two most popular and powerful candidates
were, to even the inexperienced eye, golden priest alphonso and his
brother phillipus.

now, since the death of the great high priest it was very plain the
latter had come into more favour. why, it would be hard to say. a little
whisper here, a little whisper there. "he is ambitious"—deadliest sin in
a path of life that fosters ambition. and golden priest alphonso, with
his far-reaching, numerous feelers, like the octopus, must have been
conscious of it. yet the poor were his upholders. one night a week, at
his own board, they were his guests, and he was seen sitting down with
them. _this_ man ambitious? the people's friend alphonso! that means so
little and so much, just as in the days of our own french revolution.

but now the night had come, and everything was a buzz of simmering
excitement.

thanks to tickets sent from mr. barringcourt, probably through golden
priest alphonso, sir john, miss crokerly, and rosalie were enabled to
go. the sebberens only got one ticket, as happened in most houses, and
that at a side table, still a place of honour, where the wealthiest sat,
and were content to sit.

the golden priests, robed in their flowing vestments of richest satin
and cloth of gold, sat interspersed amongst their guests, at the two
principal tables. the great hall was crowded, and so constructed that
all speakers, from one end to the other, could be distinctly heard when
there was silence.

it was an off-shoot of the great temple, and was called the golden hall
because its ceiling, walls, and other adornments were overlaid with
gold. men were there in the preponderance, but there were women also
from the more influential houses. people were heard lamenting the
absence of lady flamington. somehow or other to-night, even in that
tumultuous world, her presence was missed.

rosalie was there. rosalie, in shimmering grey, like frozen shining
_crêpe_, only soft and clinging. she was as one in half mourning among
that brilliant throng. on her shoulder was the shining frog, shining in
green and white, and for some reason or other her face was very pale,
and her eyes big and bright.

on the opposite side, a little farther up the table, mr. barringcourt
sat. he wore the curious gleaming jewelled pin she had seen before, and
the persistent red light it cast was nothing short of wonderful. on the
side lower down sat golden priest alphonso. still farther off sat
phillipus. to-morrow the race and the fight would be decided.

now on this great occasion the golden priests themselves did not speak.
naturally, a man cannot speak on his own behalf. the only thing he can
speak for is a cause.

but when dinner was over (and it was finished in a remarkably short
time, being, as it were, but the trumpet sound calling to greater
things), the friends and upholders of each candidate spoke in turn. no
names were mentioned—views only were put forward, facts also. each
speaker was allowed fifteen minutes and no more.

the speeches began in earnest, and they revolved round the two chief men
of those chosen—for and against.

now it was plain that the unfortunate episode of the lost handkerchief,
or rather _found_ one, still rankled deeply in people's minds. a debt of
gratitude was still due to the man who discovered and made known this
scandalous piece of information. affairs in the temple had for centuries
been kept too close. a great high priest was needed whose actions would
be as light as day, and character above reproach.

so on the speeches went, all interesting and conclusive, because they
all pivoted on one concrete thing, a handkerchief with a rose in the
corner. the thing itself was never mentioned, for that would scarce have
been diplomacy. like the serpent, the handkerchief was hidden out of
sight.

and so on one little lie, or piece of misunderstanding, one man was
gaining a position which clearly was too good for him. so at least
thought rosalie. she studied the faces of the two candidates, and took a
sudden fancy to that of phillipus. he came from a line of uncrowned
kings. the speeches were going against him; he bore it with dignity and
polite attention to every speaker.

at last one speaker, bold with champagne, ran full tilt at the red rag,
rose, or whatever else it can be called. he spoke of it openly, and the
result was—fatal.

for suddenly the frog said to rosalie, "speak!" and being obedient, she
spoke.

she rose to her feet with one deep spot of colour flaming into either
cheek, the rest white as snow. a curious silence fell on the room, which
had been silent before.

"i think there has been a little misunderstanding about the
handkerchief," she said, in a voice that ceased to tremble. "it belongs
to me. i never saw the great high priest in my life, but i did go into
the most sacred place three years ago, with—with a petition, and by
mistake i left it there."

now there was a certain purity in rosalie's voice and simplicity in the
words that carried conviction.

for half a minute silence followed, then golden priest alphonso broke
the silent spell.

"what right had you going there? you! a woman."

"i—i was very much in earnest."

"then," said he harshly and pitilessly, "you are to blame for all the
events of the past three years." then his voice altered, and he said:
"truth is pleasant. it is a relief to find the late high priest was
better than one thought. but you, what excuse is there for you, to keep
silence so long, and let a man go to his grave misunderstood? fear, i
presume, of being found out."

"i knew nothing," said rosalie, in a kind of self-defence, for the
expression in his eyes under the hypocritical sternness was very
sinister. and then someone hissed at the far end of the room, and then
someone else. truly the serpent was alive, and no golden image either.

but hissing was contrary to the dictates of good manners in such an
assembly, and the chairman called to order. rosalie sat down trembling,
all colour gone from her face, though she had sufficient strength of
will to keep her from giving any further signs of the ordeal she had
passed through. her eyes travelled magnetically from the face of the
golden priest to that of mr. barringcourt.

he was leaning forward, his elbow on the table, looking at her. in his
eyes shone the old mocking, laughing light, that said in so many silent
words, "now you've put your foot into it." they showed no sympathy.

then a man, seizing the opportunity, got up and spoke in favour of
phillipus; another, then another. the tide seemed turning—was turning.
rosalie sat as an icicle. every now and again she felt the sinister eyes
from below, the laughing ones from above, fixed on her.

who would have thought the popularity of a man hung on such a little
thing as a handkerchief?

then at last mr. barringcourt got up. in the midst of passion and
eloquence, he was passionless. in spite of his height, in spite of his
deep, unfathomable eyes, in spite of his firm mouth and certain lines
upon his face, he seemed to be by far the youngest who had spoken, in
manner, in voice, in a certain confident easiness. people settled in
their places, smiled when he smiled, and became suddenly more
good-natured, for at times he had a very bewitching smile.

rosalie looked at him. she recognised that in lucifram she had never
seen so handsome a man, or one with so much grace. a dull pain and a
sharp pain struck at her heart together.

"ladies and gentlemen," said he, for on these occasions titles were
disregarded by the speaker, "the record speech of the evening has been
delivered by a lady with a style and simplicity it would be impossible
for us to beat." (popular opinion fluctuated. was rosalie so bad as five
minutes before they had imagined? the speaker spoke so easily, he made
them feel more easy. wonderful gift of oratory!) "now i agree with my
friend, the golden priest alphonso, the lady should have spoken earlier,
when things could have been righted. but her silence no doubt sprang
from the best intentions."

"that's all very well," called a voice. "but what about going into the
sacred place against orders?"

"when one is in earnest, one goes much farther than one intends. it's an
unconscious action. the lady said she was in earnest; she has accounted
for what she did."

"she's liable to severe punishment."

"so then are all the women who looked at the serpent when the curtain
fell. i remember hearing a conversation between two sisters who were
present at that—that unfortunate service. one fainted, the other
retained presence of mind. since then they have scarcely spoken—one was
enabled to see so much more than the other. it is generally acknowledged
that all women worthy the name did what was natural."

whether mr. barringcourt were laughing or no, there were few there who
took him anything but seriously. they considered this the acme of
perfection in simplicity of reasoning, for the time, at any rate.

"but," continued he, "to return to the general subject, the choice of a
great high priest. it seems to me the greatest fault in the past has
been the age of the chosen candidate. what one wants at the head of such
a great organisation as the church is younger men—younger blood—younger
principles and ideas."

dissentient voices.

"you don't agree with me. but lately i was travelling in lucifram in a
country of world-wide respect and renown. it surprised me at first to
find all the places of importance filled by comparatively young
men—state, church, professions, even trades. in the centre of their
chief city i saw a famous statue in marble of a man, and underneath in
letters of gold was carved ‘aged sixty-five.' there was no mistaking it;
the smallest child could read and understand it. on seeing this i made
inquiries, and was told his history by the high sheriff, himself a man
of about fifty-five.

"his name was hugo de bretton, and as a lad he had been an errand boy,
and in that capacity acquired an unfailing stock of good manners and
alertness, the necessary adjuncts to all successful men who are not
boors. from thence he travelled the ordinary roads of success till, in
due course, he became a great banker. his own fortune was enormous—his
power equalled it. this at fifty. at sixty his wealth was increased. at
sixty-five he seemed in the very zenith of his glory—physically and
mentally of astounding strength. his name a magic spell in speculations.
then suddenly he resigned from public life." here a shrewd little smile,
almost imperceptible, wrinkled mr. barringcourt's face.

"now, you know," continued he, "that a man who amasses a fortune, a very
great fortune, i will not say how great, does the greater part of it by
stepping on other people's corns—not intentionally, but he does step all
the same. and with increasing gold his feet at times become so heavy
they do more than crush corns—they crush life unconsciously.

"this man was no fool. the past had been very profitable years to him;
so should the future be. how great a sacrifice his self-resignation was
it would be hard to say, but it was done with little ostentation.

"he lived for a period of fifteen years longer, and, i venture to say,
in that time he did more practical good than any statesman or soldier of
his time. he gave of the accumulated experience of life, generously and
widely. he invested large sums for the aid of respected and aged poor, a
thing which hitherto had been thought to be the work of the poorhouses.
he spent the last years of his life a philosopher and philanthropist,
respected and beloved—leaving the outward battle of life for those who
had still to win their spurs. so great was the impression left by his
conduct that others, lesser men or equal, followed suit. and gradually
the law came in that all at sixty-five resigned their office, not as
unfit for work, but as having done their full share of labour in the
field—ready to give advice when sought, and ready to turn a life's
experience into a profitable channel for the good of the community. and
with such critics standing by, capable of judging, and unsparingly, it
acted as a spur to the generation following.

"and so it is that age is there the most respected. generation of
workers follows generation in perfect order. in state, in church, in
every division of labour there is vigour and freshness. for why is the
church to be excluded? on the plea of sacred exemption? a most sacred
fallacy that is so ticklish it won't bear touching, and holds together
pretty much as the old crimson curtain in the temple held, till the hand
of god, through the agency of moths, tore it down from the rings of
gold."

"there's many a man young at sixty-five," one argued.

"have i not given you a notable example of one who turned his mind from
business to philanthropy, and gave his mind and energy and wealth to
it."

"there's many a man has died soon after giving up the business of his
life, if it's compulsory."

mr. barringcourt laughed.

"he's either narrow-minded, with no interest outside his own affairs, or
he worships his work above the serpent. he should be careful."

"many of our finest clergy are over the age you mention."

"they push out or keep down the younger men who are just as fine. if
they wish to remain in office after age, let them work for the love of
the thing—for nothing."

then he sat down. and not long afterwards the guests departed.

"what a curious speech that was of mr. barringcourt's," said miss
crokerly to her brother, as they drove home.

"yes. he'd argue black was white when in a mood to do so. but i'll call
on him to-morrow. according to his verdict, there's only three years
good work left in me now."

"he didn't say that," put in rosalie from her corner, where she had been
sitting mutely. "just think, sir john! under certain conditions you
might paint the best picture you ever did in your life after sixty-five,
and what a great thing it would be if you gave the proceeds to some
great scheme of general improvement, that had too much genuine good to
have any of the sentimentalism of charity in it. i think it would be a
splendid thing, and economise resources."

"under the new _régime_ we'll have to become spartans," said he, not
unkindly. "but tell me, rosalie, is it true that the lost handkerchief
belonged to you?"

"yes," she answered, breathing quickly and leaning forward. "i went
there one day, nay, twice, when i was in terrible distress. i never
mentioned it before; i didn't quite know how to. but some day i'll tell
you all, but at present i would rather not. has it made any difference
to you? i had to speak to-night. it has weighed so long on my mind. and
i couldn't bear to hear them bringing that up as a blot on the late high
priest's life. if it had not been so cruel, it would have been
ridiculous."

"we wish to know no more than you care to tell us," he answered kindly.
"and it has made no difference. the time was awkward, certainly, but you
had not been here long enough to know how things were going,"

"oh! but it's mr. barringcourt," she continued quickly, with a queer
ring of pain in her voice. "he knew, and has known all along, and could
have spoken and set all things right. it was cruel, cruel! i can't
understand that anyone who spoke as he spoke to-night could act as he
has done."

"did he know about the handkerchief?" said miss crokerly.

"he must have done. he—he—he was at the temple the same time as i. if
only he had spoken sincerely! but it was simply to further the schemes
of an ambitious man."

when they got home miss crokerly went up with rosalie to bed. a fire was
burning brightly in the bedroom.

"rosalie, did you ever know mr. barringcourt before you met him at the
sebberens'?"

"yes, indeed. i stayed in his house nearly a week. i met him first in
the sacred place of the temple."

"why were you staying at his house?"

rosalie looked at her with the look of fear and pain in her eyes that
had haunted them half the night.

"if i tell you, you'll never repeat it, even to your brother?"

"no."

"well, i was born dumb, and i remained dumb till i was twenty-two, and
then he cured me completely, just as i am now."

miss crokerly would have doubted, but rosalie's tone carried conviction
as before.

"and it took a week for the cure to be completed?"

"no. afterwards he kept me as a prisoner. i ran away, or something led
me away. i don't know which."

"it's a curious tale. almost unbelievable."

"i know. that's why i never repeat it. i should have gone to be an
inmate of todbrook's home, but i couldn't bear the thought of it,
somehow or other."

then miss crokerly went away. she saw that rosalie was overwrought and
tired, and recommended her to think about nothing till morning, and go
to sleep.

when the door was closed, rosalie flung herself down in a chair before
the fire, and the frog hopped on to the mantelpiece.

"why did you tell me to speak?" she cried. "i did no good. only incurred
cold glances and hisses and hatred."

"flea bites," said the frog.

"bred out of serpent's poison, anyway. if i'd followed mr.
barringcourt's advice i'd have said nothing."

"he always goes by the rule of contrary."

"it's a rule i never learnt."

"it's answerable for a great deal that happens in this world. why do you
take things so much to heart?"

"oh, i don't know. i'm a lonely, lonely woman."

"i'm a lonely, lonely frog."

she laughed. "you make light of my misfortunes."

"i think you are much more fortunate than you think. i bear a charmed
life, and yours is the next best thing. we'll struggle on together,
anyhow. remember, we're in search of six white horses and a capable
driver. that's all we've got to mind."

"of course," said rosalie. "life's more like a dream than reality."

here the frog yawned, and rosalie, much soothed, was soon asleep.

chapter xxviii
revenge is sweet

next day this particular city of lucifram was buzzing. the great
election was coming off. yet there was no doubt who was winning. golden
priest alphonso had regained his old popularity. when the poll was read
at night he headed the list. the people received it with shouts of
acclamation. in other circles the news was as well received. he was
barely forty. a precedent was established. he was the youngest great
high priest in the record of time.

but our history is not so much with public events as private persons,
and we return once more to susiebelle and her friend miss groggerton.

neither of them had been at the great dinner, but the one had heard from
her father, and the other read from the paper, the trend of general
events.

"and," said susiebelle, with pious horror, "to admit right out she'd
been into the most sacred place—a place no woman has ever been in
before. such impudent boldness is enough to make one's hair stand on
end. she's a disgrace to our sex. if i met her in the street with the
emperor himself i'd turn my head away."

as this was never likely to be, susiebelle was very safe.

"yes; but what i can't understand is mr. barringcourt's conduct," said
miss groggerton. "i hear that he defended her, or the next best thing.
made everyone laugh and then serious at the same time."

miss groggerton was green when she said it, but susiebelle became
greener.

"pa says no right-minded woman would care to hear her conduct made the
subject of open criticism, and if she'd had a ha'porth of modesty, she'd
have kept her tongue still. but i know the kind she is. those pug-nosed
women are all alike. pushing themselves to the front if they have to pay
body and soul for it. have you seen brother james peter yet?"

"yes. he called the day before yesterday. and i explained to him about
her. he was to be at the dinner last night, so he would see her."

just at this moment, in accordance with the old proverb, brother james
peter made his appearance. he has been previously introduced to the
reader at the beginning of this book. once brother james peter fell over
a footstool, and got lost in the dark, was laughed at by his brother
priests, and to this day heard occasional remarks made about his
conduct. he remembered very well the source of his misfortunes, and had
again scented the innocent cause of them all. he was the first to hiss
last night, proving himself to be a true cross-breed of the serpent.
to-day he came in as one with news. he had given his vote; for him the
day's work was over.

"you look pale, sir priest," said miss groggerton, who would have called
up the devil to prove him another, behind his back.

"the events of last night have distracted me," he cried, sitting down.
and miss groggerton rang for his favourite collation of whisky and ham
sandwiches.

"tell us, is it true?" they both cried, as the provisions were being
prepared without.

"that woman is in the power of the evil one," said he solemnly. "and the
sooner that little squat animal is taken by the hind leg and cast into
the fire—the—better."

"yes, indeed," said miss groggerton, in joyful anticipation of
slaughter.

"i believe it's that frog that gets her a reputation for beauty.
loathsome little thing!" and susiebelle shivered, and then laughed.

"listen to me," said james peter, raising his fat finger. "make none of
your own little spiteful remarks, but listen to me."

being a priest, he spoke as one in authority, and the women submitted.

"that woman," said he, "is a dangerous and unprincipled character. three
years ago—listen carefully—she came into our temple and pretended to be
drunk—dumb, i mean. she used to come and kneel up close to the crimson
curtain, and i believe she contaminated it and made it rot. she used to
look up at me with her lovely eyes (she has lovely eyes, mademoiselle
susiebelle, whatever you may think), and point to her lips, and shake
her head, and i—i used to pity her. she gave me to understand she was
praying for the gift of speech."

here the women laughed shrilly, shook with laughing, as he had laughed
long since.

"but that," continued he, "was all a ruse. she was waiting her
opportunity to slip inside the curtain, eaten up with preternatural and
unwomanly curiosity. but one afternoon, as it was getting dusk, i went
into the choir stalls to get a psalter that i needed, and thought i
heard a curious sound coming from out the sacred place. i could not
understand it. i hid myself in the shadow of the carved screen,
suspecting theft, and recognising sacrilege. a little later, out came
this woman, carrying a light. i know not where she got it from. but
seeing me, she ran all down the nave at quickest speed, i following."

"you caught her?"

"the devil helped her. she escaped; and at the door she turned right
round and put her tongue right out at me, and said: ‘did you ever know a
woman who couldn't talk if she wanted to?' you have the story in a
nutshell."

"and you never reported it?"

"three hours afterwards. i was as one imprisoned in a living grave for
three long weary hours."

"but did you not tell?"

"yes; and the great high priest would not believe me. he laughed. that
was the beginning of all his troubles. he was too lax, they say. under
the new _régime_ there will be greater strictness." and he sighed.

"why, she's a witch, a witch—an impudent, underbred thing," said
susiebelle excitedly. "have you told mr. barringcourt?"

"i am not personally acquainted with him. but last night, from the way
he spoke, one might almost have thought he was excusing her. of course,
there was no putting out of tongues or giving pert answers last night;
she spoke as meek and as mildly as you please."

"if it hadn't have come from the mouth of a clergyman i wouldn't have
believed it of her," said miss groggerton, glad to have such a reliable
source of information.

"but—but" continued susiebelle, "isn't there a severe punishment for
going inside the curtain, for a woman?"

"it used to be to have her tongue torn out."

"who will do it? who will do it?"

"no one will do it nowadays. the biggest punishment would be a fine.
pawn a few jewels; it's done in no time."

"she doesn't worship the serpent at all; she worships that little
blinking frog," said miss groggerton.

"well, i've got my eye on her. and if there are any heathenish practices
going on, you may be sure i will report them before long," said he, and
soon afterwards got up to go.

that same night, when all the wear and tear and excitement of the day
were over, and all the cabs had rattled home, and all the theatres been
closed, the new great high priest sat in an arm-chair in mr.
barringcourt's study, whilst the owner sat in his accustomed one beside
the table.

sacred priest alphonso was white and haggard, and the deep lines on his
face showed the strain that he had passed through. his arms hung heavily
on the arms of the chair, his eyes were fixed on the carpet. mr.
barringcourt was writing a letter. when he had finished it, he sealed
it, and tossed it on the table, then bent his eyes upon his guest as a
doctor sometimes does upon an uncertain patient he treats as an
experiment. without saying anything, he got up, and went to a
side-table, and poured out two glasses of red wine. one he filled, the
other only half, then turned his head round and looked at the priest.
still he sat in the same weary lethargy. a smile curved mr.
barringcourt's lips. "very far gone," he muttered, and filled the glass.

then he took it across and offered it to him. he took it carelessly and
drank all the contents. mr. barringcourt drank half his and flung the
rest into the fire. it blazed up in a brilliant red light, then died
away as suddenly, leaving the fire dark, as if water had been poured on
it. but this beverage must have refreshed the high priest wonderfully;
for suddenly rousing himself, he looked up at mr. barringcourt, and
said, slapping his hand upon the chair arm:

"to-day has ended successfully. but the first thing i do on coming into
office is to bring that woman to trial."

"which woman?" said mr. barringcourt, sitting down on the opposite side
of the fireplace.

"that fool who nearly spoilt everything last night by having too long a
tongue."

the wine surely had had a heating effect.

"miss paleaf?"

"yes. the one i took rather a fancy to at the sebberens', and asked you
to introduce me to." and he laughed cynically.

"oh," said mr. barringcourt easily, "you'll let that die down. set a
constant guard of two priests to watch the curtain. such vigilance will
satisfy the people. besides, crokerly is doing the work of the
panelling, and none can do it like him. you can't afford to quarrel with
him over the mischiefmaking propensities of a woman."

"do you mean to say you would look lightly on her conduct of last
night?"

"of course! she did you no harm. it's herself she's harmed, as she'll
find out as time goes on. it's always best to be a bit forbearing with
women; they're given to flying off rather unexpectedly at times."

"no excuse. no excuse at all. she did it from malicious intention and
love of meddling."

"what do you propose to do, then? tear her tongue out?"

"imprison her for life."

"o lord!" said mr. barringcourt, and he laughed. then he laughed again,
and again he said, "o lord!"

the other frowned, and the light of anger glinted in his eye.

"you seem to rather approve of her conduct," he said. "certainly i have
to thank you for your speech, though, candidly speaking, neither i, nor
i believe anyone else, could make head or tail of it" (he spoke in a
genuinely puzzled voice), "and for various other things i have to thank
you; but in the matter of dealing with this woman, i beg you will not
interfere."

"yes," said mr. barringcourt, in a low, clear voice, "i shall interfere.
the serpent is like everything else. it can't afford to get too much
talked about, or its reputation's gone. if you prosecute her, you make
yourself and it the laughing-stock of lucifram."

"i uphold its sacredness and sanctity."

"cant and tomfoolery! you say i made a speech last night you didn't
understand—and i didn't take the pains to understand it myself. but if
you persist in this, i'll make another before long which will appeal to
everyone, and tread on no general corns at all, but that of the
individual."

"you are in a quarrelsome mood to-night."

"yes. i've been in the society of priests all day, and they weary me."

the other laughed.

"that's a hint to me. however, for the present you may have your way,
but i tell you candidly, if there's any hubbub made, i bring her to
trial."

then he went away; but walking along the silent streets he said:

"barringcourt's as spoilt as a child. cross him in the least thing, and
he's inside out in no time. yet in some whimsical, flimsical kind of way
he's been the best friend i've had, and helped on considerably the
present affairs. all the same, that girl shall suffer. the thing to do
in this world is to teach people to keep their tongues still. it's three
parts the battle of life."

and mr. barringcourt, left to himself, stood a long time looking into
the rekindled fire, which tells so much to those who read it properly.
and his face betokened more weariness and contempt than even in the past
years, and the lines of his features were finer.

"revenge first; thanks a very doubtful second," he said at length, and
then went off to the stables.

all through the blackness of the night the black steeds galloped, and
some mistook their dusky forms for passing clouds, and their wild eyes
for distant stars, and the rhythm of their feet for the rumbling wind.

that night, as rosalie slept, the frog left its customary place on the
washing-stand, and came close to her ear. and though all the room beyond
was dark, the light round her head and pillow was very white and pure.

all the things the frog whispered it would be unfair to say, for the
frog was working for its own ends, as most of us do, and therefore
coloured things to its own liking.

rosalie woke in the morning, and looked at the deceitful frog, now
sitting on the washing-stand, and said:

"i've been dreaming that a tiny little angel came and sang to me and
laughed. and though i can't remember one word of what it said, i know
that everything was very pleasant—so that many a time i found that i was
laughing too."

chapter xxix
a confession

time flew on till it was just two days before christmas, or, at least,
the festival which in lucifram takes the place of christmas in our
world.

on this particular afternoon rosalie dressed with the greatest possible
care, and looked three consecutive times sideways in the glass, to see
if her nose was any better disposed to turn downwards; but it wasn't.
still, it detracted nothing from the general effect, and, indeed, might
be said to help, if only on the side of morality, to keep her from
growing conceited.

the frog, having come to that stage when one evidently regards oneself
as quite perfect enough, felt no qualms as to its appearance, took not
one doubtful glance into the glass.

rosalie, when she was ready, put her head through the door to tell miss
crokerly she was going to pay a call; she did not say where.

miss crokerly, busy with festival matters, simply nodded her head. it
was just a little after three.

rosalie left the house, and walked on quickly till she came to
greensward avenue. coming here, her steps slackened; but she continued
walking till she came in sight of marble house. here she came to a dead
stand, and looked blindly on the pavement. her heart was beating so
quickly that if the passers-by had not been walking along so heavily
they must have stopped to inquire about it.

but from a full stop she ran lightly and hurriedly up the steps and rang
the bell. there was no escape now, for within thirty seconds it had
opened. there stood everard, just the same as ever, as silent, as
polite, no more surprised.

rosalie took her courage in both hands. there was that hideous umbrella
stand that a dowager-duchess had once exclaimed was the most charming
novelty she'd ever seen.

"is mr. barringcourt at home?" said she.

he looked as if he had never seen her before, but after a moment's pause
he said:

"yes. will you come this way?" and led her through the outer vestibule
into the wide and gloomy hall.

there he left her, and went in the direction of the master's study, but
soon returned.

the afternoon had quite faded now, and as he conducted her along the
western corridor he turned on the lights.

mr. barringcourt received her almost silently. he made some remark about
the weather—it was of little importance. he drew a chair for her.
rosalie sat down.

"i came to see you," she began, clasping her hands tightly inside her
muff, "because—because—"

"because," said he, in the most distant of voices, "you wished to see
mariana."

"no. i'm afraid i was too selfish to think of mariana. i was thinking
only of myself."

she did not notice the alteration in his expression, because she had not
noticed the previous hardness of his voice. but she got a vague idea he
was not particularly pleased to see her, yet was determined to go on.

"it has sometimes struck me," she began hurriedly, "that it was very
ill-mannered of me to run away from you. i—i—i escaped by a little door
in the stable wall."

a very curious silence followed this remark; then rosalie continued:

"the country beyond was very beautiful—at least, i thought it was. it—it
led me to a white house, with a low verandah and a pretty garden. it
took me a whole day to go, and the sun was setting when i got there. in
the house i met a youth—at least, i thought he was young; but afterwards
he told me he was nearly as old as you. but he seemed to grow very
quickly in the time that i was staying there. he took me to his father.
at first i thought he was very old, because his hair was white. i had
just one day's holiday when i was there, and then i went to live in a
little hut all alone, with a plantation in front of it. i sowed a basket
of seeds in the ground that the governor (that is the name i knew him
by) had given me. but first i had to dig in the soil, and i didn't like
digging at all; i hated it. after that, everything went by the rule of
contrary. the seeds never came up; they grew underneath, and looked to
me like very beautiful jewels. but they took a great deal of digging out
and freeing from the soil. i took them to the governor, and he sent them
somewhere, i think he said it was to the city, to be tested and valued.
but every time they were sent back and marked as rubbish. i've never
felt quite the same since. i used to feel young before, but ever since
i've felt as old as old. and i do nothing but pretend all day long, in
little and big things alike. i pretend least with you of anyone, and
that night i ran away from you in the street (you remember it?) i felt
quite surprised, and in one way just a little happy. it made me feel
just a little more alive. but after a while the governor said i had
better come back again into the world. i didn't want to, because there
was nowhere to go to, and i did not want to come back to this house
again. i was tired of prisons. but when he told me to come back into the
world i was obedient, because i knew he was much wiser than anyone that
i had ever met before. he was kind to me in some ways, although he never
threw kindness away. so one morning i started on the return journey, and
brightcoat came along with me for company.

"when we were in the streets, i went along scarcely knowing what i was
doing, i was so tired, and at last i sat down on a doorstep. it was sir
john crokerly's, and when his sister came home she took me in; and i
have lived there ever since. there is nothing else to tell you. now you
know all, you need trouble yourself to be agreeable to me no longer.
after all, i owed it to you to tell you. you gave me a greater gift than
i thought it possible anyone on earth could ever give me. and you no
doubt put it down to science, but i put it down to god. and—and about my
coming here, when first i did come to you. i came from the sacred place
of the temple. i had given up wishing to be cured of being dumb—at
least, praying to be cured, because i thought god was not wishful to
cure me. and i prayed to the serpent just to help me to live the right
way, because i knew that that was the only thing god really cared about
and the serpent seemed quite to disappear; in its place came the
presence of god. only one little ball of light and gold was left out of
all that giant frame and jewelled head. and i don't know quite how it
was i came to you, any more than now i have gone to miss crokerly."

with these words said, she got up and stood facing him, for he had not
sat down during this monologue but stood looking at her, a thing which,
after first beginning, she seemed quite unconscious of.

her words had been simple, her sentences short and abrupt, and at times
somewhat disconnected, but rosalie's voice was so sweet that it seemed
to run like a silver bell in and out the mazes of this experience.

now she held out her hand.

"i have detained you long enough. perhaps you'll forgive the school-girl
style. though i feel so old, i can find no other."

"come with me to the stable," said he, "and show me the door. i don't
believe there is one."

"you will be able to find it yourself."

"i had much rather you came with me. it is the only way in which i can
credit your story."

so together they went through the silent house and silent grounds and
silent shrubbery. the red light shone full down the middle pathway to
the stable door. but brightcoat shed a softer brilliancy round about, if
not so clearly and direct. but then there was no need for it as guide
to-day.

the stables shone out with a certain curious light of their own—a dusky,
shadowy brightness.

at a certain touch the unseen door slipped backward, and revealed the
shadowy twilight within.

and as is customary with horses, they turned their graceful heads and
looked with wild eyes on the newcomers, and one in the far corner
neighed. but they seemed shadowy. all were shadowy. eyes shone like
carbuncles, the only distinctive feature. and there was nothing of
warmth there. everything was cold and chilly as a vault

but brightcoat's light was useful here. it shone in direct rays on to
that little unnoticed door that was built so unobtrusively in the wall.

"there," said rosalie, and she touched his arm. "i went through there."

"strange," said he. "i never saw that door before. how did you open it?"

"with the key of my uncle's safe. but that has gone. i don't know what i
did with it. i was in such a hurry to get through and close it after
me."

"and the path led you to a low white house with a verandah?"

"yes. let us return. it is cold here. you'll give your horses rheumatism
if you keep them in so damp a place."

"you are not acclimatised. but we will go. strange i never noticed that
door. as for the others, i suppose if they did notice it, they imagined
i had done so too."

when they were back again in the house, which seemed cheerful after the
intense cold without, mr. barringcourt said:

"will you have tea before you go?"

"no, thank you. our last tea together had not a very pleasant ending,
though it began so charmingly. we're like most people—best friends when
parted."

"then i may not see you again till festival night."

"do you still renew the invitation?"

he laughed.

"if i were not very contrary, you would make me angry. you harp so
constantly upon an unreasoning subject."

"ah!" said she suddenly. "let me see mariana. send for her."

"not to-night"

"yes, to-night. i will not keep her longer than a minute. just to see if
she is just the same."

"she has not altered. take my word for it."

"you said if i came here i should see her."

"you must have misunderstood me. i never said so."

"i—i don't believe you ever mean me to see mariana again," she said.

"indeed? what makes you think so?" and he laughed again, not at all
kindly.

"because you know quite well that i should do my very best to persuade
her to come away with me."

rosalie bowed, and swept away toward the door, and when she got there
she said to everard, quite loud enough for mr. barringcourt to hear, who
still stood in the hall:

"when next you see mariana, please give her my love, and tell her i
asked to see her, but was not successful."

he bowed solemnly and let her pass, but took no further notice than if
he had been made of stone.

chapter xxx
festival

now came christmas night. on lucifram christmas day wasn't marred by any
subsequent church-going. it was nothing better than a heathen feast; the
serpent had nothing to do with it.

on that day the children went simply wild, and gave themselves
incredible airs; demanded their best toys, gorged oranges and apples,
made themselves ill with plum-pudding, demanded their full share of
turkey, and got it, and looked with expectant eyes on the iced cake when
it appeared. just as if they'd been starving all day! the little
wretches!

the grown-up world, unless it was going out to an evening party, yawned,
and ate its customary christmas fare, and drank it too. then the old
people played cards, and the young people sang, especially the young men
with untrained voices, and the lovers behaved as if they really were in
love with one another.

come and watch rosalie.

now that day there had arrived two christmas presents so beautiful that
many an empress might have envied them. the first came early in the
morning, before the postman; a curious and unusual thing. there is no
doubt santa claus was on the war-path, for such a lovely ball and
reception dress could only have been made in some magic fairyland. it
was like shining silken _crêpe_, all frosted over with tiny sparkling
jewels, all in white. it shone like soft pure snow in the sunlight, and
fell in folds of simplest grace. it was so very simply, yet so very
wonderfully made, that one wondered what it was that gave it such a
beautiful effect.

"is it not too dead white to suit me?" said she to brightcoat, after
going into raptures on its beauty.

"see here, there is a little box below," said it.

and rosalie opened it, and uttered the most real cry of delight in her
life.

"it's my stone, my first stone, that i loved so, all set in gold and
ready to wear. oh, brightcoat, brightcoat, look!"

and she sat down on the bed and hid her face in the pillows, and cried
from different emotions. at last she wiped away the tears and looked up,
her eyes falling on the shining stone again.

"i love them all as if they were my children, and that somehow the most,
because it was the first. and i believe it loves me too. look how
beautiful a ray of light it sends towards me! and i never hoped to see
it again."

rosalie took it up, and kissed it, and shed tears upon it, but the light
from it was never dimmed; one might have thought it was made tear-proof.

"i need no other colour. this is quite enough. and you, brightcoat."

"yes; of course, there's me," said the other thoughtfully.

this was the beginning of the day. but when the postman came, besides
bringing letters and cards without end, some of the latter bearing
halfpenny stamps after the style of circulars, he brought a parcel, also
directed to rosalie, in handwriting that the frog declared was superior
to anything it had ever seen.

it was opened in public, and inside was a pair of slippers as white as
snow, and worked in diamonds. and they were such a curious shape they
looked as if they must really be antique, because they had little square
toes, and gold straps across. they reminded one of the daintiest garden
clogs, so light were they, and when rosalie put them on she wanted to
dance right away.

"they're made on the same pattern as the little wooden clog i have
upstairs," cried she. "look, miss crokerly, they dance of themselves,"
and in excess of spirits she pirouetted round the room, and kissed both
those elderly people from superabundance of excessively childish glee.

where they had come from she didn't know. she thought they had come from
the same source as the first, although they came by post. so that
evening she dressed for the real pleasure of the thing. and when it came
to pinning the jewel into the bosom of her dress, her hands trembled
just because she loved it so. it shed just the same soft shades on to
her dress as the light of the moon might shed on to the snow—a passing
green and golden and palest blue that melted into white. and on her
shoulder the ever—present frog, and a new light in her eyes, because the
ice-tears had rolled out of them.

and underneath the shining jewel her heart beat quickly. she went with
sir john, miss crokerly having preceded them in mr. barringcourt's
carriage some time ago.

"do you know," said she, "i thought at the last minute you'd change your
mind and stay away."

"oh, no," he replied. "i always go when barringcourt throws his house
open. there are so many things that interest me there."

"yes. it's quite after the nature of a museum, is it not?"

"yes. unlabelled. so that it has an additional charm."

they took their turn in the long line of carriages, and after a
considerable time were enabled to alight.

there was an awning from the parapet to the door, and the steps were
also covered a deep red.

rosalie looked for everard. he was not there. two powdered footmen
instead. they were not inmates of the marble house. neither were any of
those who personally waited upon the guests that night. there was not a
waiting-maid anywhere about to compare with mariana, and rosalie could
not have imagined her proud and delicate face amongst that throng. but
how different did the wide hall look that night! brilliantly lit, and
with huge fires burning at either end. fires fit for festival and
freezing weather. and no undue crowding of guests to do away with
comfort and beauty and enjoyment. the wide doors to the southern wing,
leading to the picture-gallery and conservatory, were thrown open. so
also were those to the west, containing the reception rooms—no empty,
echoing fireless places now, but full of life and laughter and vivacity.

a reception was held first; dancing did not begin till eleven, when a
well-known princess was to lead with a gavotte. she was very proud of
her instep.

at twelve supper was to be served in the large subterranean hall, a
place rosalie had never been in, nor, indeed, anyone else. and after
that dancing began again, and continued till four. then carriages and
home.

on entering, rosalie was presented with a programme that explained all
this. it was book-shaped, with a mother-of-pearl back, and in the centre
a perfect little garden clog with a broken string in gold, and
underneath "christmas 0039"—that being the year as reckoned in lucifram.

"oh, how charming!" cried one lady, who had just received hers before
rosalie. "an old clog for luck! it is delightful!"

flowers the most gorgeous and tasteful banked every available corner;
truly, the house had been completely altered from darkness into light.

mr. barringcourt on these occasions made an excellent host. he had none
of the clumsiness of the bachelor host, being for all the world as much
at home as if he'd been married and had ten children. now, it was a
dancing night, and thanks to an excellent example, there was not one
smoke-absorbed, or card-absorbed, or billiard-absorbed man present. for
one night everybody made a delightful martyr of themselves, and secretly
enjoyed the process.

rosalie's programme did not fill so quickly, for there were many there
who took her to have religious mania, and doubted they might have
something to put up with. moreover, there were very few persons there
that she really knew. at last she was suddenly accosted by mr.
barringcourt.

"the first and last dance, rosalie," said he, and they looked at one
another. then looking down at her programme, he said: "what an empty
list!"

"it's quite right, thank you. i don't care about dancing. i'd rather
watch other people, and listen to the music. find me some quiet old lady
whom i may sit by, and who does not talk too much. it is all i ask of
you."

"there are not many present. they are all young and frivolous, or old
and giddy. a much easier task would be to find you partners for every
dance."

"i should be dead tired before supper-time; i can't talk to strangers,
and i don't know every dance. and it takes rather a brave man to accost
me; i perceive them mentally screwing themselves up to the pitch as they
approach."

"under those circumstances, it was very kind of you to come. here comes
the princess. i'll return later."

the princess smiled so condescendingly all round that everyone was
charmed with her. she had a light walk, as one who treads on eggs and
fears to break them, and her admirers said she glided as the spirits do.

as soon as she came—and, of course, she came rather late—the proceedings
of the evening began. she danced the gavotte, and brought her own
dancing-master and fiddler to play, as she was accustomed to be played
up to.

when the real dancing began there was one of the best bands in lucifram
in readiness, that all the evening more or less had been playing
favourite airs, and another to relieve them when occasion needed.

mr. barringcourt sought and found rosalie.

"should you not have given the first dance to the princess?" said she.

"no. my step does not suit her, and she is sufficiently truthful to tell
me of it."

"i can scarcely believe _your_ step is wrong."

"no? she is easier to deal with than you. she goes greatly on credit.
it's a royal failing. come, let us begin; if this waltz is as it should
be, it will be all too short."

and no seventh heaven could have surpassed, if equalled it.

"how lovely," said she suddenly, "if one could die dancing!"

"it would mean company on a lonely road," said he. "and cheat death of
some of its tragedy, with well-matched partners."

"did you—did you send me those slippers that i'm wearing?"

"what makes you think so?"

"the little clog on the back of my programme. it's the exact fac-simile
of one i used to wear."

"i had a little story as near as possible to that of ally krimjo. for
one morning there was found in the middle of my hall a little garden
clog without owner or companion. it came there through barred doors and
spring-barred doors, and none could make out how it came there. not even
i. i never learnt it till the night when you came to say your lesson. i
proved it when you wore these little satin-covered skates to-night."

"you'll give it back to me?"

"oh, no! i'm keeping it for luck. that is a lovely stone you're
wearing."

"it's one i told you of. dug from the garden with a great big fork and
spade, just as a man digs."

"i believe i've seen it before in my father's house."

"no, indeed. unless your father was the governor i spoke of."

he laughed.

then at last the dance was over.

"i've found the lady you asked me for," said he. "miss crokerly is my
guardian angel to-night. it is she who discovered her. here is an
excellent place where you may sit and see everything, and hear the music
to advantage too."

and then he took her to a seat, and introduced her to a lady sitting
there. she was so charming a companion. her silences were never awkward,
and now and again she would give rosalie information about certain
people, all of a good-natured if shrewd kind, that was the highest
entertainment.

at twelve punctually the company descended to supper.

the staircase down was of black marble, and spiral also, like the one
above. it had none of the slippery treachery that characterised its
sister staircase, though, and it seemed altogether of a much more
reliable make. to a spectator the gay colours of the ladies and their
sparkling jewels looked like brilliant multicoloured scales on a
gigantic serpent, reared pillar-wise to support the vast chamber below.

the subterranean banquet hall of marble house was nothing better,
nothing worse than a crypt.

it had great and massive pillars of hardened, blackened marble; a
fitting support for a fitting house.

its floors were tiled in marble. its walls of marble too. but whereas a
crypt, if lit at all, is content with lamps of oil, or the feeble
glimmer of electricity, this place was deluged with light. the most
brilliant candelabra hung from the ceilings, sparkling in the thousand
glintings of diamond glass. the tables were covered with finest
snow-white cloths, and all the decorations were of silver, purest and
brightest and most finely worked. and all the flowers were red.

here, screened from view, the band was playing gently. a soft and
scented air of luxury arose, as if to show that crypts upon occasion
have finer possibilities than dining-rooms.

the princess, led by mr. barringcourt, descended first, and half way
down stopped to admire.

"which was the pirate, you or mr. todbrook?" said she. "i'm sure you
carted off the plan of a cathedral, and the material too."

"that is an open secret," replied he, laughing. "but his was the theft,
not mine. i simply inherited what he had left. but he had gloomy taste.
now, were i building, i'd fix upon a little bungalow, a whitewashed
place, with a world-wide garden for the summer-time."

the princess was not of that simple nature that enjoys simplicity, but
she delighted in anything odd, as she considered it, because it made her
laugh.

"do you really mean to say you are philosopher enough to grow accustomed
to things?" she asked.

"till i see a way of escape."

"and you see none from here?"

the princess had not such keen eyes as rosalie; she was not fond of
studying faces, except for what animal beauty they might possess.

"none," said he. "although 'tis said todbrook escaped by the back door."

"he died," said she, and looked at him with a vague suspicion of horror
in her eyes. she was of a superstitious nature.

but he laughed.

"you talk of death at a dance?" said he. "one might almost think,
princess, you were primitive, and scorned the guarded terms of
civilisation."

the conversation had taken a turn not to her fancy. he had thrown a
shadow over the brilliantly-lit supper-room. she shivered involuntarily,
and looked about her petulantly, and said:

"are you quite sure this place isn't damp?"

"not at all! not a rheumatic dampness, anyway. spirits do not count;
they are above it."

then their conversation ran into a lighter channel suited to the
occasion, and the feast began right royally, when the plumed peacock was
carried in, to be admired in death, a lasting tribute to its vanity.

the band played, and the people laughed and feasted and talked. in the
whole of lucifram that night could not have been found a gayer or more
brilliant company.

chapter xxxi
mysteries in marble house

but there was one person who never came down to supper—at the right
time, anyway—and that was rosalie. she had strolled off alone to the
picture-gallery, led to look again on that curious representation of the
former master of marble house.

the silence as the last guest went down below made her heart beat a
little faster. she listened to the last echoing laugh, and he seemed
listening too. the slightly bending figure indeed betokened an attitude
of close attention—almost the hidden smile of one who, listening,
understands.

the long line of pictures ran either side of her, each in itself a work
of beauty. she remembered that day when mariana had gone off to the east
wing from here.

to-night the east wing was closed. all this great glare of artificial
light never traversed there. a heavy crimson curtain hid the polished
door that led to it.

but rosalie's spirit wandered off in that direction. a great curiosity,
with a deeper feeling underneath to give the strength it needed, led her
out into the central hall—led her gliding towards that gloomy fatal
door.

she drew the curtain back with one white hand, white as snow against
this deeper shade, and turned the handle. the door opened. blackness,
dampness, and the smell of decay and mildew met her, like a blast of
foul despair.

she threw up her head, passed through, and the door slipped to behind
her. and for one moment it seemed as if the parting kiss of freedom
glowed on her forehead once again. and yet again the darkness was
dispersed, for both the frog and jewel, and her own shining dress, that
shone apparently without the aid of outer light, gave all the light it
needed.

and here, within this gloomy place, at last came life and beauty, and
the soft, tender light that lived in its own strength and was
unborrowed.

no. 13! how well rosalie remembered it! mariana's workroom, a worse
place than many a prisoner's cell. yet it had about it an air of
indefinable grandeur, the place of no petty criminal, or one sunk in
moral disease. the rusty latch uplifted and disclosed the low-built room
beyond, and the dim burner, the oaken chests, the damp, peeled walls,
the shadowy corners, the tragedy of silence.

but what of these? they served but as backgrounds to a picture, and
fitting backgrounds. for there, beside the long, low table, hid by the
sheet, as white to-day as ever it had been three years ago, sat mariana.
but nothing there equalled the marble whiteness of her face. her
graceful figure bent forward, her hands were clasped on the table, and
on her lips was that curious smile of pain, quite frozen there, as, wide
open, her eyes stared at this hidden treasure on the table.

some spider, mistaking the silent figure for a thing inanimate, had
weaved a web of finest threads from head to foot, covering her silken
hair and rough-spun dress. but respecting the icy chill that hung about
those cold-cut features and hands, it had left them free and bare.

all about the cell fluttered the silent moths, settling and rising from
the table. yet they were powerless to canker anything. the bitter iron
of living sorrow had too hard a crust.

the light that rosalie brought with her lit up the room. she stood upon
the threshold, gazing spellbound with horror on the central form. could
this be mariana—this frozen statue, this figure nipped to the spirit
with unavailing pain? oh, never, never! for there this beautiful
machine, working so fine a marvel of creation, had come upon a horrid
pause, a fearful counterfeit of death, a fearful mockery of life!

then the spell broke. with outstretched arms she hurried forward.
"mariana!"

no sound or movement came in reply. she placed her hand upon the
stiffened shoulder. the cobweb broke; the spider saw, and ran away. she
threw her arms around the other's neck, and kissed her stony cheek. no
sound or movement in reply.

burning tears fell from her eyes. they had no power to melt that which
had been congealed so long, frozen from ice to marble.

nothing availed—even when she fell upon her knees, and pressed her warm
lips a hundred times upon the death-chilled fingers.

powerless and weak! o god! for strength, strength, strength of some
sort, to give life to the dying or the dead! what blasphemy! what
heresy! what presumption!—the ignorant tumult of a still untutored
heart. then she drew back and looked at mariana, fighting down every
emotion to make way for thought. her eyes fired with indignant protest,
and she said:

"i'd rather be a murderer out and out and hanged for it! and to think of
this night, when in this very house there is no sound of anything but
gaiety and laughter; and people feasting! and here there sits a prisoner
and worse, and one man conscious of it. oh, brightcoat! how can you
think well of such as he! i cannot bear to look at him again." and then
she stooped and took the slippers off she wore. "i wore them happily at
first, but now they're all so tight they pinch my feet i wonder what
sweating or freezing system it was brought them into shape? and i so
selfish as never to insist before on seeing whether she were free or
no."

the slippers off, she looked at them, then at the silent figure sitting
there, and turned away, half-shivering. she placed the slippers upon the
table on the sheet.

the moths descending, fluttered round them, yet did not touch; for,
taught by instinct, they had learnt what could and what could not return
to dust.

then with one parting call of "mariana!" one loving kiss, one shivering
glance around the dismal place, she went away, closing the door behind
her, into the outer passage.

curiosity bade her try some of those other low and numbered doors; but
all were locked. this tragic wing was surely haunted. the air was
condensed of sighs—an essence which hung heavy on the heart.

but before opening that crystal door, all rusted iron and cobwebs from
this inner side, rosalie stood still to think. then she pushed it open,
and emerged into the brilliant hall, still silent. from here she passed
toward the staircase leading down to the supper-room, where all the
guests were now assembled.

but to return to them.

there was no lack of merriment throughout the length of tables. but as
the supper progressed, and people became accustomed to their
surroundings, general comments were made upon a long and double-folded
curtain of heavy material that hung from floor to ceiling at the lower
end of the vast chamber beside the staircase.

there was present at that supper a young girl just out that season—as
giddy, as merry, and full of happy spirits as one unknown to care or
saddened thoughts can ever be.

and to close a spirited discussion with some as young and thoughtless as
herself, just as the feast was ending, she left her place amidst a
laughing silence, and ran to the farther upper end of the table, where
mr. barringcourt sat beside the princess. with the happy assurance of
youth never rebuffed, she accosted him.

"i come," said she, still laughing, "to plead on the side of our
religion. they say that dismal curtain bears a resemblance, and a very
striking one, to the crimson one within the temple. will you not
contradict them?"

he looked across the room toward it "one's black and the other's red,"
he said, and smiled.

"yes; but we were discussing what might be beyond," and her face was
demure, though her eyes were sparkling with merriment.

"with what result?" said he.

"we all grew curious. princess, will you be curious, too?"

"oh, instantly. what is beyond that curtain, mr. barringcourt? tell us,
or show us, pray."

the silence of expectation had settled on the guests. barringcourt
leaned forward toward the table, playing with the half-filled glass of
wine beside him. and when he spoke his voice was low, yet perfectly
distinct.

"you know," said he, "it was a foible of mr. todbrook's to collect as
many heathen gods and false ones as lay in his power. this house was
built on a system—i might say systems—of idolatry; its furniture
collected from disused temples sought for all over the face of lucifram.

"behind that curtain stands a god, more hideous than any i have ever
seen, and i've seen plenty in my time, as maybe most of you have done.
the curtain came along with it from the temple where it stood, and in a
state of wonderful preservation. over one thousand years in age."

"what is beyond?" was the general question throughout the chamber.

"a death's-head of unusual size, worshipped and feared of all in the
parts from where it came."

"let us see it." a general murmur of anticipation ran round the room.

"these poor heathens!" said one lady, and her tone was patronising. "how
ignorant they must have been."

"and are still in some parts, madam," said he.

"we do our best with the missionaries," she replied.

"let us see it, please."

this was the voice of the charming youthful pioneer from the back.

"it's a death's-head," said he, and he smiled very kindly as he spoke.
"they are not beautiful."

"but i've enjoyed myself so much all evening, mr. barringcourt, that i
could not bear to be disappointed now. besides, the princess has
commanded you. please show us the head."

"it has never to be seen but in complete darkness. it's a clause of the
will. it was the condition on which he bought it, i believe, from a few
crazy priests, who had no congregation."

but they all wished to see it, light or no light. it was a little
novelty to wind up supper and take the place of toasts.

so suddenly the light switched out, and left the place in total
darkness. those who were on terms familiar enough clasped one another's
hands. they found the situation not unpleasant.

and then upon the instant the black curtain swung backwards and revealed
a space beyond, from which gleamed out, in ashen whiteness and dusky
hollows from the blackness, the skeleton head of death. it was the head
of some great giant of unusual size, with yellow teeth discoloured, but
all present. all looked at it with gloomy interest, and some began to
wish, as darkness continued, they'd been less eager to examine it.

but suddenly and swiftly in the silence two gleaming balls of light
glared red from the empty sockets, to turn their gaze at every
individual round the room, and with a gleam most sinister. this was
truly horrible. a room so black and dark that none could see each other.
the bleached skull and skeleton of a superhuman head. and above all the
terrible gleaming eyes, the only flash of light in the whole room, that
had the power of penetrating, and gave each the impression the evil eye
was fixed on him alone. a spell of silence had fallen. no woman cried;
the laughter of ten minutes since had died; even the very sound of
breathing was now quite hushed. this was the deadened, powerless load of
nightmare.

suddenly a light appeared on the spiral staircase. the gleam of snowy
whiteness, the soft glow of an undying lamp, and the pure colours of a
splendid moonshine. and above all a face and figure of most simple
beauty, eyes pure and starlit in contrast to the red gleam. and a crown
of mermaid flaxen hair, and expression sweet and thoughtful! it was a
wonderful and sweet relief to the ghastly spectacle below.

and on a sudden the full lights flashed on again, and a sigh of relief
burst from every heart and many lips. the black curtain had fallen.
rosalie alone remained of the weird scene, descending the spiral
staircase. a little thing will often bring about reaction, and from
being shunned by many, she from this opportune arrival gained a fair
share of popularity.

"where have you been?" a dozen voices cried, glad to make sound again.

"trying to find a partner," cried she, and laughed; and others laughed
as well, the search had been so long and unsuccessful.

"supper is finished."

there was no lack of those to offer attention now, and along with this
came the general bustle of those leaving the supper-table.

but by the side of mr. barringcourt stood the girl who, from a mixture
of youthful spirits and curiosity, had asked the first the curtain might
be moved.

"i am glad i had finished my supper," said she, with an attempt at
laughing still. "i'm sure i could never eat anything in here again."

"it is fortunate refreshments are served upstairs," he answered. "you
would not let so small a thing interfere with your evening's pleasure?"

reassured somewhat by his tone, she said:

"after all, it was only an idol, was it?"

"that's all. they must be very brave folk to worship it, eh?"

"yes. the serpent is much less gruesome. isn't it?"

he laughed. "well, an empty skull often looks much worse than it is."

"but," said she, "it wasn't empty. i never saw such eyes. never! never!"

"you haven't seen the serpent yet?"

"no; but mother did, and she said nothing about its eyes. she said it
was plain to be seen we worshipped the true god, his scales were such a
lovely gold. i am going to ask miss crokerly to introduce me to her
friend. i'm sure if she had not come then i should have fainted right
away. and i always laughed at blanche for fainting. she used to do it so
conveniently."

so saying, she slipped away, and to the upper regions, where, so far as
she knew, there was nothing gruesome hidden away.

and soon the episode of the death's-head was forgotten, and the
evening's enjoyment began again with even greater zest.

rosalie's programme filled, but she never danced. who could, when
wearing only stockings? but she did not go home, but waited for that
final dance, and no one noticed her slipperless feet.

chapter xxxii
diplomacy

"i have not the slightest inclination to dance, mr. barringcourt. i've
spent one of the most delightfully lazy evenings i ever spent in my
life."

"i envy you. i've been going through a species of treadmill. i've danced
with every school-girl in the room."

"myself included. you began the evening badly, you know."

he sat down beside her.

"where were you all the supper-time?" he asked.

rosalie looked at him. she detected the old, tired, wearily contemptuous
expression on his face. she herself was far from tired. her eyes were
bright. her cheeks had flushed a pretty pink; she had been under no
unwilling exertion to please anyone.

"i stayed upstairs to see how long i'd be forgotten, and when no one
remembered me, and i grew hungry, i came down."

"you should have acted the part of the jealous fairy godmother, and
blasted us all."

"well, though i be a school-girl, yet i've none of the attractions of
youth, and so i've learnt toleration."

"it's hardly fair to keep repeating what i once said at random."

"was it at random? i set a whole night apart to weep about it."

"you had nothing better to do, then?"

"the most miserable of all states, you must acknowledge. and through no
fault of my own."

"whose, then?"

"yours. you have much to be answerable for, mr. barringcourt."

he laughed. "i have expiated most of my offences to-night; i have danced
the polka."

"with miss sebberen. i saw you."

"let us go into some quieter room. this dancing wearies me. i never was
fond of it."

rosalie's trailing dress hid her feet, and they passed into the
picture-gallery. it was deserted.

she sat down under the picture of geoffrey todbrook.

"one day mariana brought me here and showed me this picture. i forget
what was said, but somewhere in our conversation she laughed. she said
laughing always produced a pain at her heart."

"mariana laughed? you utterly astonish me."

his face betrayed no signs of conviction of cruelty, certainly.

"yes," said rosalie. "it is astonishing, truly. had i lived here as long
as she, laughing would have been utterly beyond me."

"it is a good thing you escaped, then."

"you don't grudge me my freedom?"

"i grudge no man anything if he wins it, or woman either. and far from
grudging you your freedom, i'm glad you won it."

"you were glad, then, when i ran away?"

"well, no—not at the time. i do not know that i ever became thoroughly
reconciled to you till you came to see me the other night."

here a pause followed, broken only by distant strains of music.

"you have another dance on new year's eve, mr. barringcourt?"

"yes. you will come? it is the one night in the whole year worth dancing
on."

"i would come gladly; but i can find no dress to my liking."

"you have a week before you."

she clasped her hands round her knee, shook her head and looked at him.

"i won't come unless i can wear exactly what i want."

"and what is that?"

"the dress that mariana was making long ago. but i expect she's finished
it, and the moths have eaten it away. but all the same, i won't come
unless i have it. it is the one thing on earth i've set my heart upon."

mr. barringcourt looked at her. the pretty air of reasonless
determination suited her.

"it's impossible," said he.

"the moths have eaten it away, then," and without pretence or acting two
big tears rose in her eyes and fell—one for sorrow at his hardness, one
for the memory of mariana in the cell.

but two tears upon occasion can be very fascinating.

"you never did reason, did you, rosalie?" said he.

"yes. it's the one thing i've done all my life. but the simpler you are
in this world the more you're derided. let me see mariana to ask her
about the dress?"

"oh, hang mariana!"

"are you speaking broadly?"

"what do you mean?"

"you should never use abusive language towards the individual. i learnt
that long ago. if you want to be profane you should generalise."

"whose lax teaching was that?"

"i learnt it from the governor; the gentleman whom i met when i ran away
from you. but he wasn't lax, i'm sure. perhaps i misunderstood him."

"i wouldn't put it beyond you. but give me a form of forcible language
that would fit in with his exposition."

"well, the only one that presents itself at all to me is ‘damn it.' you
see ‘it' means nothing in particular, is quite impersonal, and therefore
no one is any the worse for it, yourself included."

"you're an advocate of that particular form?" said he.

"i'd allow it to you upon occasion, but not to myself."

"indeed! why?"

"because if i were a perfect woman i'd never have any inclination to go
further than the ‘d.'"

"you're striving after the perfect woman?"

"yes," sighed rosalie; "but she's very delusive. it's so easy to
overstep the bounds and become saintly."

he laughed. "i don't think you'll ever be that."

"but why?"

"the strain would be too great. you'd best remain as you are. i believe
the dance is ending."

"and—and never a word settled about my dress."

"are you so much in earnest about it?"

"indeed, yes. i went through all the pains and penalties of trying it
on, stood three weary hours as model, and it was so beautiful my heart
longed for it then, and has done so ever since."

"it's nothing but imagination. you must look for something else."

they rose together, and suddenly she put her hand upon his arm, and said
in just such a voice as a mermaid might, half laughing, half
plaintively:

"i won't come to dance the new year in; i've nothing fit to come in. and
as for the slippers that you sent to me, you can search for them just
where you like. i don't want them, and i won't wear them. i only want
the dress." and she showed him her foot in its silk stocking, without
slipper or other covering.

"where are your slippers?" said he.

"i've hidden them, and you may find them."

and suddenly he looked at her quite sternly, and he said: "you've been
to see mariana."

rosalie returned the glance as meekly as became the situation.

"the doors were all unlocked. besides, you should have found me a
partner for the supper-time. i resented it."

"and what do you think of mariana?"

"i think that you and i are inexpressibly different in our idea of
things."

"indeed! it is because of you she's placed where she is."

"and because of me you ought to place her where she isn't."

"i am not disposed to laugh. your constant prying is objectionable."

"i pay dearly for it: hard words and cold glances from everyone,
yourself included."

"not too high a price, it seems."

"dear me, no! i trust to the luck that saved red chin's wife. i'm not in
the least bit inclined to cry to-night, mr. barringcourt i feel happy
enough to dance without slippers on." and she stooped and kissed the
precious stone she wore.

he looked at it and then at her. "give that stone to me," he said
suddenly.

her cheeks paled as quickly. "i love it too well to ever think of
parting with it," she answered.

"the price of mariana's freedom."

"no," and her voice was a mixture of a gasp and weakness.

"and yet you love mariana! how you do misjudge the word! you don't know
what love is."

"neither do you."

"i make no professions."

"i have no right to give away this stone; it was given to me."

"keep it, then. i simply asked for it to prove your inherent
selfishness."

"you could have proved it by a much simpler test. it is one of the
dragon's heads impossible to conquer. every now and then i give it a
sleeping potion, and get some rest. it's very efficacious, i can tell
you."

she turned and went away, and they did not see each other again that
night, or rather morning.

chapter xxxiii
the worth of a jewel

the next morning, rather earlier than usual, mr. barringcourt called to
see miss crokerly. he saw her alone; but as he was crossing the hall on
going away, he was stopped by hearing rosalie's voice from the
staircase, and by seeing her coming toward him.

"i have been waiting for you," said she, raising her finger as if in
warning as she came nearer, and speaking very softly. "the dragon is
sleeping, completely under the influence of a powerful drug. in the
interim i've brought you this. the thing you asked for last night." and
she held toward him a tiny jewel-case.

he took it slowly, looking at her, and then at it. then the contents
dawned upon him, and he looked at her again and laughed, though his eyes
had a piercing keenness in them that took away the effect of the
laughter.

then her manner changed, and she too laughed. she raised her lips to his
ear and whispered:

"i drugged the dragon with _reason_, think what you will," and still
laughing, would have moved away.

now it just chanced (for those who find no excuse for what followed)
that there hung just above them a bunch of misletoe. miss crokerly was a
great advocate of christmas parties for children, had had three such
since december began, and holly and other christmas decorations were
much in evidence. but neither person concerned was at the moment
cognisant of this fact. one was looking down, and one was looking up,
but not at the ceiling.

but all the same, in opposition to the laws of etiquette, yet quite in
accordance with those of nature, mr. barringcourt suddenly stooped and
took her hands and kissed her. it wasn't a bit like the ordinary kiss a
man would give a woman. it fell as softly on her lips as a breath of
snow—nothing of fire—so that she laughed again, and shook her hands
free, and saying "thank you," ran away again.

after that mr. barringcourt went away, looking as thoughtful and
preoccupied as if he had never been frivolous in his life.

he went home, and passed at once to his own private laboratory and
study. he took with him the tiny jewel-case, and going up to one of the
big windows facing the front of the house, took out the stone and looked
at it. he looked at it so long that a bystander would have grown
impatient. then he went to the other side of the room, and opened what
seemed to be a cupboard, but was really a set of shutters opening upon a
window looking on the garden at the back. the light from this window
showed the jewel differently.

before it had been softest green and pink; now a constant red ray
gleamed from the centre. he noted it, and turned it many ways. the light
still remained—no passing brilliancy or change of colour. then he went
into the inner room, and noted the different blendings and the texture
by placing it beneath a glass, there to examine it minutely. finally he
poured out from an old flagon, worked and chased in a substance like
polished silver, a liquid that flamed up in the crucible like
white-flamed fire, intense and beautiful. and into this he threw a stone
that matched in some respects the one he carried in his hand. under this
great strength of heat it disappeared; no tiny fragment of lustre or of
substance now remained. and quite remorseless to its fate, he next flung
in the stone that rosalie had given him, and bent forward eagerly to
notice the effect.

no change! a glimmering blend of colour on the surface of the flame.
then with his fingers, as if the leaping tongues had been but water, he
took the jewel out, and dashed the sprays of fire away like drops of
water.

a smile, incredulous and all surprised, at first played on his lips and
in his eyes as he looked at the jewel. then after some deep thought, he
started as one from a dream, the light of sudden understanding in his
eyes. he placed the stone once more within its case, and put it in an
inner pocket, then left the room and locked the door again.

leaving the wing, he went out into the central hall, and passed across
it to the eastern side, with its brilliant door and exterior brightness,
all so false to the sordid truth behind. but there he paused, and called
across the high, empty, echoing space:

"everard, what is mariana's number? i forget."

"thirteen." the answer was simple and distinct.

"that's a lucky number, isn't it?"

"i believe it's a significant one. unlucky, some say."

"we go by the rule of contrary. i think myself it must be lucky." and he
laughed and flung open the great doors and passed inside. they swung to
after him.

then at the door he sought for he stopped, and with the same quick
movement threw it open.

inside, the miserable cell, the scanty furniture, the covered table, the
cobwebs, the thick dust, the cloud of hovering moths, the stiff and
rigid figure; but to his eyes on entering, not the central figure of
attraction. for there upon the table, standing daintily upon the
covering cloth, he saw the little satin clogs, with their golden strings
and skate-like edges, that turned up daintily, bearing an almost
laughable resemblance to someone's pretty nose. for in the same way that
many persons' clothes on wearing them become a part of them and look
like them, so these, scarce worn, became and looked a part of rosalie.
and in the midst of all this mildew, and decay, and icy lifelessness,
they stood a thing of life—an open protest against everything
surrounding them.

without looking toward mariana, he went and took them in his hand. they
were not soiled. they had only danced one short delightful dance, and
stood demurely side by side, longing to start again. the moths had never
touched them; they were invulnerable. then placing them once more upon
the sheet, he leaned his hand upon the table and looked at mariana.

neither pity, distress, cruelty, nor any other emotion played on his
face. he stood and looked at her, as deep in thought as if his mind was
occupied with pages of a book, a long, long time. then throwing back the
covering from the table, he revealed the thick piles of satin that she
had worked at in the three years passed long since. so this was the
dress that rosalie coveted; well, it was worth asking for, or would be
when finished.

for the first time on lucifram, and here in one of its most dismal
cells, a smile free from artifice, from cynicism, from pride, from
cruelty or contempt, ran on his lips and centred in his eyes.

but the machine? and how to set it working? only one way. he crossed to
mariana, laid one hand upon her head, the other in her hands, and
stooping, kissed her lips.

then very silently, as some passing from life to death have done, she,
with a sigh that trembled gently into every limb, swayed back to life.
and on the second breath that stirred her bosom, looked up, and her eyes
came to the face of mr. barringcourt.

"you've slept long enough," said he. "you can't complain now of being
overworked. a long spell of rest, and now comes a short one of work. are
you ready for it?"

"yes."

she rose from the chair, no stiffness, the old slow, easy motion born of
coldness; itself born, who could tell of what.

"six days to finish this—and alone. can you accomplish it?"

"for whom?"

"rosalie."

"has she asked for it?"

"yes."

she stretched her arms, then drew them in.

"it's well, because i fitted it for her, having no other model."

"you are to make it especially beautiful."

"it is not necessary to tell me so."

"and jewels? everard will bring them to you."

now she raised her eyebrows slightly and looked at him, and a faint
smile came to her lips.

"is rosalie then so strong to bear so heavy a burden of sorrows as this
house affords?"

"search all you can find from the dust hidden in this room, and he will
bring the rest. did rosalie appear to you so weak?"

"i loved her on that account i think."

"part of a cause that changes weakness into strength. you feel yourself
strong, mariana?"

"oh, no! but cold. the strength of ice, not iron."

"rosalie has suffered from your complaint, i think. but she's cured."

her eyes rested on his. there was a thoughtful expression in them, and
she said:

"cured? then the ice was frozen less deeply."

"or maybe the fire was stronger. there's something in that, you know."

"yes," said she; then suddenly: "these moths are a great hindrance. i
have no time to spend in sighs if i must work hard and finish in six
days."

"then i'll remove them for six days. after that they'll come back again,
but you'll have finished."

"yes. for rosalie. and when to wear it?"

"new year's eve."

"thank you. now you had better leave me. what of these slippers?"

"sew them with jewels."

"and make her tired feet? is it some practice of cruelty?"

"no. a whim of mine. to show honour to an escaped prisoner."

"i must wake. six days to make a dress, and it is rumoured that one of
the planets was made in that time! i must hasten."

so then he left her, and she worked alone. and hour by hour some fresh
seam in the design became completed, and on the third day everard came.
he carried a large sack, and it was full of jewels of every known
description, small and large. standing there, he said suddenly:

"can i help you with these? sorting or stringing?"

"but surely it's against the rules."

"it is advisable to break them in emergency. and i doubt if this be not
finished, some great calamity will rise. the master is away. the work is
out of all proportion to the time. for his sake, for yours, and for
hers, i wish to help you, for this day, at least."

so mariana gave way, and one little flame of heat passed over the icy
barrier almost unconsciously. the cell, being less lonely now, lost its
ghastliness.

thus the time passed away until completion, the last day of the old
year, the eve of the new.

and on that afternoon at four o'clock mariana heaved a sigh of apparent
contentment, for all was now in readiness. and everard, having done his
full share in the arrangement of jewels, and whatever else was needed,
returned to the door in order to welcome mr. barringcourt, who just then
returned.

chapter xxxiv
"a gift, a friend, a foe, a beau, a journey to go."

to return again for a brief interval to that day following christmas
day. mr. barringcourt, when he had left mariana, went to see the great
high priest, and afterwards attended with many others the service of
dedication of the curtain. miss crokerly was there, but not rosalie.
afterwards mr. barringcourt said to the new high priest when left alone
together, and the guests departed:

"why didn't you invite miss paleaf?"

"i have told you why. i am only waiting for a sufficiently good
opportunity to bring forward the trial."

mr. barringcourt's lips set. "you make a great stir about nothing," said
he.

"i don't forget the awkward time at which she spoke."

"and when do you propose to send out the summons?"

"on new year's day. a public trial and an ecclesiastical court."

"and you as judge?"

"oh, no! there is golden priest ferdinand. i take no further steps in
the matter publicly."

"and the punishment?"

"life-time imprisonment."

mr. barringcourt looked at him and laughed.

"you laugh? after all, it is worth nothing better. people must be taught
a proper respect for established religion."

"in childhood, yes. i doubt when they get older it's too late. and so
you contemplate lifetime imprisonment?"

"could you suggest anything better?"

"well, there's escape. what do you say to that?"

"futile. absolutely futile."

"the devil has helped her once; he may do so again."

"the devil! who or what is that?"

(they were ignorant of such a person on lucifram.)

"ah! i had forgotten. he was never fashionable here. the devil is a
libel on virtue; the exact imitator of god."

"and she is on familiar terms with this—this atrocity?"

"i owe a general pardon. i was confounding him with a superior being, an
error commoner than one thinks of."

"you speak in riddles," said the great high priest, and his tone was
irritable.

"i mean to say god helped her to escape twice before—nay, three times.
you are brave, to say nothing more of it, to put another spoke in the
wheel."

"by god do i understand you to mean the serpent?"

"as you will. to my certain knowledge she has kissed the serpent. the
sensation must have been a new one, almost a dangerous one. after ages
spent hearing the dull praise of men coming from lips all stereotyped,
one soft kiss would have its—er—its value."

the great high priest looked at him sternly, as became his office.

"the serpent is above such petty considerations," said he. "you speak
with too much levity of sacred things."

"a fault of my education. forgive me for it. and the summons is to be
issued on new year's day?"

"or on the eve."

"i understand you. god and his counterfeit will help or hinder you.
good-night!"

next morning, walking in the park, he came on rosalie walking with the
frog. quite unconscious of the impending trial, she stopped on meeting
him.

"good morning!" said she. "you look very thoughtful."

"yes. i'm thinking of taking a very unusual step."

"what, pray?"

"paying a visit to my mother," and he looked at her.

"that means your father, too, does it not?"

"no," he answered, still looking at her in the same thoughtful, absent
way. "i frequently visit him. at present they are separated."

now it was her turn to be thoughtful. "that's very sad, isn't it?"

"sadder than you'd think of; for, but for the irony of fate, they would
be quite inseparable."

"and is it an unusual thing for you to visit her?"

"yes; i do not care to burden her with my presence, unless there is some
reason in it."

"that sounds unnatural. does she love you?"

"as much as i love her."

"that conveys nothing to my mind. your powers of love are very
enigmatical."

"they're simple enough on a worthy object."

"and she is very worthy?"

he made no answer, but said presently, with sudden decision:

"mariana has begun upon the dress. it will be finished on new year's
eve."

"and i to wear it?"

"yes."

"i went to see her. you guessed at it. but she seemed more dead than
living."

"a little extra sleep. she said she needed it."

"what of the jewel that i lent you?"

"it is very safe. i have a request to make to you."

"what is it?"

"i wish to beg the jewel for my mother."

"what is she like?"

he smiled.

"words cannot describe her; to my eyes, the perfection of beauty and
loveliness. as innocent and simple and free from care or evil as the
light."

"you don't resemble her, do you?" asked rosalie, unconscious of the
bitterness of her remark.

he laughed, perceiving it.

"you may rest safely assured there. i know no one who resembles her."

"is she kind?"

"the essence of it."

"then what of mariana, and such as she?"

his brow clouded. "you ask questions i'm not disposed to answer."

"ah! but i'm thinking of my jewel. i love it so. your mother would not
value it a tenth part as much as i. nay, before to-day it, and others
like it, have been reckoned rubbish. she might think so too."

"give me leave to take it to her, and await her verdict. if she
underrates it, i'll bring it back to you."

"i'm afraid i must give the dragon so strong a dose there'll be no life
left in it."

"if it is what you told me, the more honour remains to you in killing it
with such a potion."

and rosalie laughed, but her eyes were wonderfully serious, and she said
simply:

"i'll give it to you, mr. barringcourt, because it seems to me to love
one's mother is the greatest and the simplest thing in the duty towards
one's neighbour, if that mother is as she should be. and it is more than
pleasant to me to know that somewhere in the wide universe there is
someone who has broken through the natural hardness of your heart, and
called forth a respect and love of which i never thought you capable."

the remaining days till new year's eve passed quickly. the weather was
gloriously fine, the sunsets unequalled.

early in the evening mariana arrived, and brought with her a large box
containing the dress and other things. she came in a carriage drawn by
chestnut horses, not occupants of the stables at marble house.

rosalie came out into the hall to meet her, and kissed her with
affection, which mariana in her colder way returned.

together they went upstairs, rosalie suddenly finding herself very short
of words to express her delight at meeting this old friend.

and it was mariana who dressed her completely, from the arranging of her
hair to the tying on of her clog-shaped, satin-jewelled slippers.

and oh! what a dress! with designs of lovers' knots worked in
delicately-tinted jewels all over its shining surface, and a train that
hung from the shoulders in showers of priceless lace. it was studded
with jewels in the bodice, and on her hair was placed a tiara that stood
high, and had the same design worked in diamonds. clasps of gold and
jewels were on her arms, and round her neck one fine chain of gold—no
other ornament.

"i'm afraid, after all, mariana," said she at length, "your great
ambition has not come to pass."

"what thing was that?"

"you wished it for a wedding-dress."

"i am content to see it as it is, and you so beautiful."

"and when to-night is over you will want it back?"

but mariana smiled, half dreamily.

"to-night is not yet over, and you will never wish to part with such a
robe. you begged it from the master, and you'll keep it i know none
other who would care to bear so great a load, though in its beauty all
forget to think of that."

"i do not find it very heavy."

"it's well."

suddenly rosalie laughed.

"i say, mariana," said she, "suppose—suppose when i come to marble house
it should shine red all round about me. they'd take me for a veritable
scarlet woman. i have misgivings. i remember once before."

but mariana shook her head.

"i heard from the master you had gained strength from weakness; and i
heard from everard you had jewels of your own that you have worn to
counteract the fatal charm of these."

"not of my own, mariana; they were of god." "ah, god! i had forgotten
him. the dream has passed so long ago."

"god is no dream, but a living reality, mariana."

"i was once bitten by a snake, and here they call the serpent god. i
love not such an image, but live in the never-ending twilight. i think
it is the shadowed light the idol throws, placing itself betwixt the
world and god."

and suddenly rosalie took her hands in hers, and drew her to her with a
gentle force, and kissed her lips and forehead, saying:

"but soon the idol will vanish out of sight, and the true light come.
you needn't live in the twilight, mariana, any more than i. you only
need to trust the glorious spirit working behind the leaden cloud, and
struggle silently toward the healing light. and some day, even though
the waiting time be long, the icy burden will be rolled away, and you
all warm and bright again to love and honour god with strength
unfettered."

and then brightcoat said: "i should like to go with mariana back to
marble house."

"do you care for such a companion?" asked rosalie of mariana.

but the frog jumped across and settled on her shoulder.

"you need me no more now, rosalie. i have done what work i could for
you. but now to mariana. she may need me as once you did. and though her
heart is cold to-day, the new year dawns, and with it in the distance i
see a fairer prospect and a warmer light breaking upon the horizon of
heaven."

and so with this new companion mariana went away back to the marble
house. into that gloomy dwelling, though now all brilliantly lit, the
frog entered unafraid, and none thought to harm it, for the charm had
worked, or perhaps was working.

chapter xxxv
the sun rises on the year

a brilliant house again, a brilliant crowd, the eve of the new year, the
death-bed of the old. just three hours more to wait.

but as rosalie drove along, it was as if depression and the highest
spirits fought one another for the mastery.

"the effects of wearing fine clothing," said she, and laughed and sighed
in a breath. "there is magic in these jewels, i feel certain. oh! if i
could but wear again my own precious moonstone talisman against all
heaviness, instead of all this finery, that does its best to cramp my
spirits, and half succeeds."

on entering, she was almost immediately joined by mr. barringcourt.
never had he looked to rosalie as to-night, never perhaps she to him.
with a scrutiny which had become habitual, they eyed each other, and at
last rosalie said:

"do you not think i was right in being covetous of such a lovely gown?"

"and the jewels?"

"oh, they were an extra thrown in. i'd much rather have been without
them. you should be kind, not lavish, mr. barringcourt. after an hour's
wearing they begin to assert their individuality and weight."

"and at first you felt them light?"

"being alive to their beauty, i was dead to their encumbrance." and then
again, this time seriously, she said: "but in truth i must acknowledge,
perhaps, their weight cannot be very great, for i have the greatest wish
to dance through every dance, and look to you to find me partners. i am
not really altered because i stole behind the temple curtain; for one
night it might be forgotten."

"the first dance is with me, and the last one."

"oh, no! i am in a mood of ingratitude to-night. i cannot for the favour
of this dress, and all its valuable accessories, even say ‘thank you.'
find me a partner for the dance that's just beginning. no one has come
near me since i came."

"the first dance is with me."

"indeed, no. i'm entering on a life of self-denial. as soon as i want to
do a thing i shall cross myself and do the opposite. what chance shall i
stand of heaven, do you think, at that rate?"

"you'll never get there. be guided by me, and be less contrary."

"it goes very much against the grain for me to dance with you. must i be
consistent, or must i be contrary?"

"become impersonal, and leave the decision with me."

"you are too selfish to be altogether trusted."

"i? selfish?"

"yes. i want to dance, and here you keep me talking. i want to study men
and form comparisons."

"you can't in a place like this. on these occasions they're all more or
less alike."

"and on all others. the similarity of humanity is nerve-destroying."

"a very pleasant state of things. none but a fool would wish it
otherwise. but if you wish to dance you shall have partners in
sufficiency. i'll say you're quite harmless to-night."

"say no such thing. mariana tells me she was once bitten by a snake, and
so was i. since then i've had the greatest inclination to bite everyone
who comes near me. she took it badly; i, by god's help, was enabled to
take it well."

"what particular snake was it that bit you?"

"i think it must have been the god of lucifram."

then he left her and went away, and through the evening rosalie danced,
seemingly happy, on to that hour when the old year and the new meet and
part again.

then she sought mr. barringcourt, and found him, not amongst his guests,
but in that now deserted drawing-room where once mariana had played for
her. he was looking out on to the gas-lit streets, and the window being
open, the cold night air blew into the room. the lights in it were
shining fully, yet the city without was plainly visible.

"you have left the crowd?" said she.

"yes," he answered. "they can amuse themselves. you look tired."

she laughed, an apology for deeper feeling, and looked at him with eyes
whose tiredness was lost in a certain appeal and pathetic beauty, that
characterised them long since in the days of silence.

"i think i overrated my powers of—of endurance. i—i should be very
pleased to give the last dance to you. i left it empty."

but he shook his head.

"i have not danced all evening; i do not wish to make myself conspicuous
now."

"we could sit it out."

"we might; but i am contrary."

then rosalie went up to him and put her hand very gently in his arm, and
almost whispered:

"i have a feeling of insecurity that grows with almost every hour. it
may be childish, but i never professed to be much different from a
child. when i stay with you it leaves me more or less, and always has
done from the very first i met you. and now brightcoat has left me, and
i feel quite alone, a thing hardly enviable in any sphere. and i've gone
through the evening as best i could, and tried to get the better of my
weakness." and then she laughed and drew her hand away, and said: "if
such confessions are unusual, you only have this dress to thank for it.
the jewels have magnetic power, and draw me to the owner."

at this he turned round from the window and looked at her, and a very
curious smile curved on his lips.

"that's your solution, is it?" he said, and scratched his head
thoughtfully with one finger. then he added: "my mother said i was to
thank you for the stone you sent her."

"was she well?"

"yes. at the first stroke after midnight i go again to her. these guests
will then have all departed."

"i, too."

"you say that sadly."

"the magnetism of the stone i sent her draws me to your mother."

just then everard entered the room, carrying in his hand a large sealed
envelope addressed to rosalie. at the back it was sealed with the image
of the serpent.

"you, everard?" said mr. barringcourt, with some surprise.

"i heard the door bell ring, and knew it was no ordinary guest of the
evening."

she took and opened it. a summons to appear before the high priest's
court, and on the morrow morning, this first day of the new year.

she read it through, half mystified, the truth with some difficulty
dawning upon her. then on a sudden she handed it to mr. barringcourt,
her face as white as the background of her dress, and he in his turn
read it. then he turned to everard and said:

"who brought this?"

"a priest who, with his companion, waits outside. i did not let them
in."

master and man looked at one another, the same grim smile half visible
upon each face. then mr. barringcourt took out his watch and looked at
it.

"it wants still twenty minutes till the dance is ended. it is barely
twenty minutes after twelve. are they impatient of delay?"

"i did not ask them."

"we'll go upon the supposition that they're patient." then turning to
rosalie, he continued: "there was a time you told me that you scorned to
run away, and never had done. afterwards, upon much less occasion, you
trusted to the fleetness of your feet. and now? are you prepared to meet
the enemy?"

"indeed, no. or perhaps i cannot tell. if you stood for council on my
behalf i think i might enjoy it. for myself, i could never get much
farther than the truth."

"a marvellous short journey, with a sudden ending, but little reckoned
upon lucifram. what think you of lifetime imprisonment, rosalie?"

"ah! it is that that frightens me. i never liked the thought of prison.
must i really go?"

"what plan of escape is there?"

her brow knitted thoughtfully; then suddenly clearing, she said:

"take me away with you. take me to your mother?"

and she looked so very beautiful, with something so imperious in her
manner, yet so sweet, that little wonder if the master consented.

"it's a long journey, and a very final one, and, moreover, my horses are
black."

"i'll trust to the rule of contrary where you're concerned, and trust
you too. take me where you will. i have sufficient power given me of my
own to guard against a vital evil."

"you trust me to a certain point. no farther."

she laughed.

"i trust you altogether, but wish to show it is not quite from weakness
i wish to come with you."

"then we'll go. my mother is hospitable, and so are others round about
her. some are better known to you, no doubt, than she. a stranger is a
rarity among them. you will be welcomed."

"alas! but who can travel in a dress like this—at midnight, in the depth
of winter? it is so conspicuous."

"no dress could be so suitable. safe-guarded against wind or snow, and
simple in comparison of those where we are going. heat or cold, darkness
or light cannot touch it. it was sewn in the inner darkness, and shines
in the inner light. come, rosalie, the time is up. we must away to see
the sun rise on the new year."

then he led her through those great empty rooms into the fuller ones,
where general hilarity preceded the closing of the dance. but here they
never waited. across the palm-house to the doors of glass with the image
of the toad and temple so finely and so clearly worked in them.

at one touch they both flew open, and there, flooded in a tide of
light—red—red—and an accompanying silence. it travelled swiftly, yet
without sound or violence into the rooms of feasting and of mirth,
carrying silence and a vague alarm. and noting where it came from, the
guests instinctively crowded out towards that curious garden, on which
faced the real front of marble house.

and there, below the terrace steps, upon the wide carriage drive, stood
a chariot of gold, with seats of crimson velvet, and harnessed to it the
six black steeds, with tossing heads and eyes of fire, strong, and
sleek, and slim.

one youth alone stood at the foremost bridle. and in the midst of all
this ruddy glamour shone the pure whiteness of rosalie's robe, with all
its flimsy showers of lace and jewels. and there beside the carriage
step stood mariana, the frog upon her shoulder, and with her everard,
who had preceded them.

then rosalie stepped in lightly and gracefully, and sat down. mariana
bent forward, and with the grace peculiar to her arranged the spreading
train about her feet. then looking up, with mutual feeling each drew an
arm round the other's neck and kissed. rosalie whispered:

"you will follow, mariana, and we'll meet again, in no land of shadows,
red or black, but in the sunlight. and you'll bring everard. a little
company along the road is most desirable. but for the present,
good-bye!"

and then the master, gathering the long reins in his hand as he sat down
beside her, wrung everard's hand, and seeing mariana held her hand
toward him too, bent over it and kissed it, by that one act undoing all
the past in which she suffered through him.

the master shook the reins. a thousand tingling stars shook from them
upon and round about the coal-black steeds. one wild bound forward all
in unison, not on a straight road, but up some climbing steep.

rosalie turned round. and laughing, half in fear and half in happiness,
kissed her hand to brightcoat.

"good-bye—till—till we meet again!"

then the master turned round also, a face very unlike to hers.

his face was dark and shadowy as it ever had been. the same contemptuous
curl lay on his firm lips; a mocking laughter was in his eyes. his
glance fell upon marble house, and the guests all drawn towards the
terraces.

with his free hand he felt in the pocket of the long coat he wore.

"i forgot to leave my new year's presents, rosalie," said he, and
brought out a large handful of precious stones, flinging them down to
lucifram. then drawing out another, he handed these to rosalie, and bade
her throw them too.

they fell among the crowd, who gathered them and praised their beauty.

but the six black steeds with little apparent effort climbed up the
steep mountain-side, or so it seemed to be. and gradually the red light
disappeared, and lucifram along with it, and darkness followed.

and now there was nothing but the wind and icy snow and
loneliness—nothing but the path. nothing was to be seen on either side.

the spirited steeds, wild as ocean foam, flew up and on the mountain
track, the winds moaned after them with a song as wild, as full of sad
complaint, as if they were embodied spirits of the sighs and tears of
broken hearts.

but no feeling of cold came near rosalie. the jewelled robes encased
her, proof against everything. and gradually it seemed as if the
darkness gave way to a glimmering of light. at first it was feeble, but
grew in distinctness, steady, and still steadier.

suddenly a ray of brilliant light—light that could never blind the
eyes—shot straight across the path. then came another, another,
following thick and fast from every direction.

swiftly the coal-black horses changed in the flooding light to purest
white, visions of inexpressible and perfect beauty. rosalie's heart beat
faster with sudden, unexpected joy. she looked up at the master, her own
face transfigured by the light, as so was his. for all the weariness,
all the contempt, all the dark shadows, had vanished from his features,
and left nothing but what was full of life, of vigour, and of
kindliness. his eyes, still dark and deep, looked into hers, the first
time on the long and perilous journey, and he said, laughing, as
sometimes of old:

"do you prefer looking at me to the magnificence of all this scenery?"

but she clasped his arm in both her hands, and leaned her forehead
against his shoulder.

and suddenly he brought the horses to a check, and drawing her still
closer, bent his head and kissed her cheek. then she looked up with eyes
all wet with tears, and bright with happiness, and drawing back a
little, said:

"i never thought that things would come out this way. i—i never imagined
that black horses could come out white—nor you become so altered."

he laughed.

"it all depends upon the journey that i take. sometimes i cross upon
another rainbow, that leads us all down hill from lucifram at almost
break-neck speed. then neither i nor these, my horses, alter much. but
look, rosalie, round about you. this is a scene worth seeing and
remembering."

he stood up, and giving her his hand, helped her to her feet.

and then she saw that streams of light and rainbow garlands were flung
from a thousand spheres to meet this central road, itself a giant
rainbow crossing from lucifram (a tiny speck of gleaming red in the far,
far distance) towards a country quite unsurpassed for loveliness. and
all around, from the different worlds of light, came scenes of
fairyland.

and now she saw a towered city folded in night, the change from day; and
here the bright sunshine of mid-day glinting upon a noble river, with
sloping, tree-clad hills, and meadows smooth and green.

again the sun was setting behind a sea of golden glory, on whose
restless surface danced three round boats inlaid with pearl. and in the
boats sat three maidens of exquisite beauty, attended by the gentle
wind, their servant, who wafted them towards the distant shore. and as
they went they sang a song that trembled sweetly on the air and reached
in the soft silence to that golden car, ringing tones of happiness and
joy.

so on around: a thousand scenes, and all delightful, delicate yet clear,
country and city all in perfection spread out everywhere. and each
sphere was linked to each with garlands of lights, so that the nimble
spirit crossed on them, a perfect path of beauty.

rosalie looked and breathed a sigh of admiration. then her eyes
travelled to the path which they were crossing. the steep part had been
passed. there now remained only a lesser portion, and that sloped gently
down. this remaining part was free from danger. pillars of light
garlanded with flowers guarded the sides.

the horses, unwearied with the night's long race, moved slowly towards
this nearing country, over whose waking sky the bright dawn was
spreading wings of glory, with silver flutings right east to west. the
descent led to a regal city, where nothing mean or sordid, no toil and
tribulation, no anxious care or killing sorrow, no oppression, no dark
deeds, no foul disease, no hardened priests or creeds had ever come. but
all was god, the essence of immortal greatness.

and to this city came rosalie, led by him whom some had called on
lucifram the master. and being all tired with the journey, rosalie fell
asleep just as they were entering the gates.

for no traveller from a darker sphere can enter there unweary. the soft
air, too strong for them, wafts the frail form to tender sleep, that it
undergo the great and immortal change.

the sound of laughter and welcome, heaven's truest music of joy, and
then for us a silence.

*       *       *       *       *

so ends a little chapter in the life of lucifram. a chapter that bore
indirectly upon the serpent, and helped gradually to its undoing. but
that's another tale.

the end

_printed by cowan & co., ltd., perth._



the serf

a historical novel

by c. ranger-gull

_author of "the hypocrite," "back to lilac land," etc._

third edition—_six shillings_

=rock.=—"a brilliant piece of romance work."

mr. a. t. quiller-couch in the =daily news=.—"a novel of uncommon
merit; a historical novel of a period rarely attempted by fiction."

=observer.=—"mr. ranger-gull possesses a brilliant imagination,
original thought, and an able pen. his style is clear and forcible,
and some of the passages in this, his latest story, are full of
pathos."

=daily chronicle.=—"mr. ranger-gull deserves the warmest praise, and
willingly do we accord it.... the story he has provided, with so
carefully studied environment, is one that is strong in human
interest, and told with considerable dramatic power."

=daily express.=—"to dive deep into the chronicles of serfdom and tell
plainly the story of a long-forgotten deed of noble daring is good
work, and thanks are due to mr. c. ranger-gull for his story, ‘the
serf.' ... the story is wonderfully interesting, and appeals
irresistibly to the british temperament."

=saturday review.=—"full as it be of grim realism and ghastly tragedy,
it is impossible not to read this book to the bitter end—bitter
enough, in all conscience.... the book is without doubt a notable one.
it is written in the true spirit of the times which it so eloquently
describes."

=truth.=—"a tale of the life and death of a serf who in the old norman
days struck a blow of vengeance and for freedom. he pierced his lord
with three arrows, one for each ravished daughter, and one for
freedom, and after thrilling adventures expiates his crime by a death
of the most frightful torture. there are so many powerful dramatic
scenes in the story that i should think the advertised version of it
for the stage would be most effective."

=outlook.=—"the age is well suggested in its marring elements of
sordidness and splendour, fierce cruelty and childlike faith; and the
characterisation is strong in many types; brutal lord, drunken priest,
and chivalrous _jongleur_. the author achieves a convincing study of
twelfth century england, in the mastery of its strongholds, the misery
of its serfs' hovels, and the sanctuary of holy church."

greening & co., ltd., london.

"brimful of cleverness."—_standard._

his grace's grace

a novel

by c. ranger-gull,

author of "the serf," "back to lilac land," "the hypocrite," etc.

press opinions.

=standard.=—"mr. ranger-gull is very clever. he can write well, even
brilliantly.... mr. ranger-gull opens his story vigorously, and his
good spirits never flag. the book is brimful of cleverness."

=sketch.=—"the novel is well-constructed and brightly written. the
reader will have only himself to blame if he does not get some good,
hearty laughs."

=daily telegraph.=—"the book is amusing, with sufficient plot to
awaken the interest, though relying chiefly for its attraction upon
its epigrammatic qualities. mr. ranger-gull has put into the mouth of
some of his characters remarkably witty and sparkling dialogue, which
in itself raises the book above the general average."

=daily mail.=—"sprightly wit is the main feature of mr. ranger-gull's
comedy. it is flippant, jocular, and epigrammatic. readers who enjoy
quips and repartee will find his pages full of them."

=daily news.=—"a smart and up-to-date novel. the book is readable, and
a pleasant companion for a journey. the end, which is pure farce, is
wholly delightful."

=vanity fair.=—"it is as entertaining and highly spirited a story of
oxford life as one could wish.... mr. gull's wit is always striking,
and occasionally it fastens to its subject with very mordant force.
the whole book is admirably clever, with no pages in it dull, and some
so sparkling that they almost hurt the eye."

=british weekly.=—"it is certainly a very clever piece of fiction."

=ladies' field.=—"a very clever and amusing novel, remarkable for
smartness of dialogue. the author has plenty of wit, and this novel is
really a capable piece of work."

=free lance.=—"a lively, brilliantly-written book full of wit and
humour and epigram, sparkling from cover to cover is mr. ranger-gull's
latest novel, ‘his grace's grace.' ... there are pages of smart
dialogue which are equal to the best of almost any modern english
writer."

=bookman.=—"we have some charming comedy—a double love interest and
some clever characterisation. a book which is altogether clever and
entertaining throughout."

=daily despatch.=—"mr. c. ranger-gull is smart and topical as ever in
his latest novel. the book, topical, witty, and penetrating, is bright
reading from beginning to end."

=woman.=—"mr. ranger-gull has produced a story of sparkle and
brilliancy. the style glitters and rings like that of maupassant."

=sheffield telegraph.=—"very amusing and very clever.... the story is
mirth-provoking and inoffensive; ‘his grace's grace' is irresistible,
and no reader will regret making her or his acquaintance."

=public opinion.=—"mr. ranger-gull's reputation as a facile
story-teller will be by no means diminished by ‘his grace's grace.'"

london: greening & co., ltd., 20 cecil court, charing cross road.

a really clever story

the steeple

_a novel_

by reginald turner

_author of "the comedy of progress" and "cynthia's damages."_

=the times.=—"few readers who take it up will readily lay it down....
mr. turner is successful, and his sketches of men, women, and creeds
are, generally speaking, humorous, shrewd, and suggestive."

=outlook.=—"a purposeful story altogether out of the common ruck. it
is both daring and convincing. the portrait of frank lester is surely
as coolly relentless a thing as has been done for a long time.... it
is excellently and pitilessly done:... we would quote some contingent
excellencies. the chief, perhaps, is mr. turner's dash in carrying off
an extravagant situation.... his also is the gift of broad, almost
farcical characterisation. and to these must be added a brisk turn in
narrative, of which scarce a page lack shining example."

=observer.=—"a very well-told story; the characters are drawn with
much freshness and clearness of delineation.... bright and lively
without being flippant. mr. turner's story is decidedly entertaining
and well written, and will probably be popular."

=illustrated london news.=—"one reads with unflagging interest. the
great merit lies in the very cool and effective demonstration of
character, and especially of character that is off conventional lines.
the psychology, perhaps, is not very deep, but, in the plane on which
it works, is remarkably given. we have thoroughly enjoyed ‘the
steeple.'"

=sunday times.=—"this is a clever story, lightly told, and although it
concerns religion, the characters, faith, and scepticism is not
preachy, and the interest does not flag."

=the scotsman.=—"this story displays a remarkable ingenuity. the book
is cleverly done in the very modern manner, and is always
interesting."

=reynolds.=—"‘the steeple,' by reginald turner, is one of the most
readable novels we have lately had the good fortune to come across.
the religious and clerical element, which enters hugely into the
story, is handled so adroitly that it neither irritates nor bores,
while its latter-day actuality gives the zest of real life to mr.
turner's fiction."

=spectator.=—"the work is interesting, and the study of lester is
decidedly clever and original."

=bookman.=—"a story of far more than average merit, strongly imagined
and with considerable craftsmanship.... emphatically, this is a book
to be read."

=st. james's gazette.=—"has decided originality and cynicism enough
for the youngest of us. there are many clever touches and characters
that stand out."

=truth.=—"unusually well conceived and described."

=speaker.=—"mr. turner has shown before that he has a pleasing and
unusual vein of satire. in ‘the steeple' he turns his attention to the
worldly and successful churchman.... the book is full of entertaining
little caricatures, and some good counterfoils to them.... it is sane
and amusing, a most welcome work in these days when satire seems to be
a lost art."

london: greening & co., ltd.,

20 cecil court, charing cross road.

a brilliant novel

the comedy of progress

by reginald turner,

author of "cynthia's damages," etc.

some press opinions.

=bookman.=—"a political novel of decided interest, picturing modern
society, political method and influences, a really great lady, and a
young man who thinks. mr. turner's style is bright, shrewd, and
trenchant."

=pall mall gazette.=—"a cleverly-written story of more than usual
interest. mr. turner has here something to say, and says it well. from
the first page onward we follow the career of maurice yorke with close
interest, an interest which never flags, and the final chapter is in
every way equal to the book's earlier promise. there is nothing
slipshod, no falling off. the author has given us sterling good work
throughout. the characterisation of lady sothern is excellent—so human
withal. ‘the comedy of progress' is a brilliant novel, its title, by
the way, fitting it ‘like a glove.'"

=glasgow evening times.=—"mr. reginald turner has achieved another
success in ‘the comedy of progress.' it is a clever novel, pleasantly
satirical, bright in style, and with skilfully sustained interest in
the fanciful social and political personages who figure in its pages."

=morning post.=—"readers will be delighted with the ‘comedy of
progress' by reginald turner. the story is told with skill and true
artistic effect. lady sothern is an excellently drawn character, full
of life and force. the charm and influence which she exercises over
all who know her are quite convincingly expressed, and the scene with
her husband when she confesses herself an old woman and stamps on her
jewels is very ably done. mr. turner may be sincerely congratulated on
accomplishing a difficult task with more restraint and ability than
one generally expects in such efforts."

=spectator.=—"problems and politics are dealt with in ‘the comedy of
progress,' and both are to a certain extent successfully treated. the
story is readable, and the pictures of society are not badly drawn."

=daily telegraph.=—"mr. turner has a pretty knack of touching off a
character, or expressing a quaint thought, in a couple of lines, and
there is no blinking the fact that some of his portraits are diverting
likenesses of people he had met in the flesh."

=st. james's gazette.=—"the book is decidedly clever. maurice yorke
himself, lord and lady sothern, and jonas allen, are distinct and
well-drawn characters, conceived and maintained with considerable
skill. the story is something more than a political novel. it is
concerned with the philosophy of life and its aims. there is much
serious thought and practical wisdom in its pages, set forth in
dialogue, which is always amusing and sometimes brilliant."

=athenæum.=—"‘the comedy of progress' contains clever conversation and
well-realised characters."

=the county gentleman.=—"mr. turner is evidently an exceedingly close
observer of men and matters, and in addition he has a considerable
power of analysis of emotions and impulses of the springs which move
to action and the restraining forces which control men's natural
desires and ambitions.... ‘the comedy of progress' is throughout
wittily and well written, and ought to interest those who like a
serious subject carefully treated, and with more than an occasional
passage of pure fun and humour."

the comedy of progress

crown 8vo., cloth gilt, six shillings.

the lyons mail

the true story of the murders, told by a descendant of the murdered
courier.

_translated from the french by_

robert h. sherard.

generations of people have wept over the sufferings of joseph
lesurques, who was guillotined for the murders of the lyons mail
affair. it was supposed that he was an innocent man, the victim of a
fatal resemblance to a scoundrel named dubosc. his case has been used
by hundreds of barristers to bolster up a defence based on the theory
of mistaken identity. this book demolishes the theory of his
innocence. it is written by a descendant of one of the victims, who
proves that lesurques was guilty, that his sufferings were no more
than he merited, and that if he went to the guillotine dressed in
white, the garb of innocence, this was only a final piece of duplicity
on his part. a true story of the "good old times" in france after the
revolution, with dramatic pictures of the unequal struggle between the
police and the army of scoundrels. in illustration of the state of
things in the year iv. (1796) an account is given of the doings of a
certain bondroux, who was the dick turpin of the lyons highroad.

few chapters in fiction are more striking than the true account of the
arrest of joseph lesurques at the assize court in paris, during the
trial of his accomplices; a fresh illustration of the resistless force
or fascination of danger which draws criminals on by the most
imprudent acts to their destruction.

it exposes in its true light the character of the famous
conventionnel, merlin de douai, who inspired victor hugo with one of
his noblest creations, and suggests the reflection that if one knew
the truth many names which have come down to posterity with immaculate
reputations would stand in a different place in the public esteem.

in view of recent efforts in france to bring about the revision of a
celebrated case, the various unsuccessful attempts of the lesurques
family to have the judgment passed on their ancestor quashed will be
read with interest. they show the inviolability of the "_chose
jugée._"

price six shillings.

three stories of the stage

smart, clever, brilliant, and interesting.

_at all libraries and booksellers._

six shillings each.

back to lilac land.

by c. ranger-gull,

_author of "the hypocrite," "miss malevolent," "the serf," etc._

second edition.

=the pall mall gazette.=—"a very intelligent and well-written story. a
decidedly entertaining novel—fresh and well constructed, and evidently
written by one who understands the inwardness of _the_ profession."

=morning post.=—"a good novel of stage life is a rare bird in this
country, and the author of ‘back to lilac land,' who has given us this
good thing, deserves a full measure of praise."

=the literary world.=—"the anonymous author has written a story which
all who have seriously considered the subject must applaud as a
faithful, reasonable, and powerful account of the touring actor's
life.... ‘back to lilac land' will be classed with george moore's ‘a
mummer's wife,' and with leonard merrick's ‘the actor manager,' as one
of the three best novels of theatrical life which the last fifteen
years have yielded."

cynthia's damages.

by reginald turner,

_author of "the comedy of progress," etc._

=sunday special.=—"a bright, amusing story of life behind the
footlights."

=the gentlewoman.=—"a sprightly, amusing yarn. mr. reginald turner is
no stranger to life behind the scenes."

=ladies' review.=—"‘cynthia's damages' proves on reading to be one of
the smartest and brightest of theatrical tales we have met with for a
long time. it is most certainly a novel which will please all women."

=the daily telegraph.=—"a story in which wit, humour, farce, and
sarcasm are admirably blended—an extravaganza brimful of fun, and
showing considerable power in the management of dialogue, as well as
in character-drawing. the author appears to be what the french call a
_blagueur_, and treats the affair of stage-life and society with a
polished and easy cynicism that evokes a smile and compels us to read
on.... the story from beginning to end is sprightly and vivacious,
contains many quaint touches of observation, and is altogether a
readable book."

in the world of mimes.

by lewis melville.

=graphic.=—"undeniably interesting. every page shows that he writes
from inside knowledge."

=daily mail.=—"a lurid story of stage life. the book shows real
observation and cleverness."

=illustrated sporting and dramatic news.=—"this is distinctly a clever
book, and ably written."

=bookman.=—"a pleasantly-written story of theatrical life; vivacious
and lifelike by reason of its spirited characters and professional
details. it is shrewdly observed, and the world and the stage are both
described with facility."

_complete catalogue of popular fiction post free on application._

london: greening & co., ltd., 20 cecil court, charing cross road.

greening & co., ltd.,

18 & 20, cecil court,
charing cross road,

october, 1903:                                             london, w.c.

a supplementary

catalogue

of

new books & recent editions

in

fiction and general literature,

together

with announcements of forthcoming works.

=hudibras.= by dr. butler. with an introductory note by t. w. h.
crosland. with twelve illustrations after hogarth. foolscap 8vo,
cloth, top edge gilt, with bookmark, 2s. net; leather, top edge
gilt, with bookmark, 3s. net.

=bookman.=—"messrs. greening here give us a most interesting reprint
of butler's celebrated poem in a form which strikes us as being
entirely appropriate. the size of page, type and margin are both
delightful to the eye of a book lover, and pleasantly reminiscent of
the little volumes of the 17th century. while the fine paper, and the
dozen excellent reproductions of hogarth's well-known plays, the
portrait of butler himself, and the neat, artistic binding make it, in
its way, a miniature edition de luxe."

=the pomps of satan.= a volume of essays by edgar saltus. crown 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d.

=gœthe's life at weimar (1775–1779).= by g. h. lewes. foolscap 8vo.
cloth, 3s. 6d.

="the lyons mall."= being the true story of the murders, founded on an
authentic account by one of the descendants of the murdered courier.
translated from the french by robert h. sherard. crown 8vo, cloth,
6s.

=globe.=—"a very interesting narrative."

=queen.=—"the book is terse and interesting. it never flags."

=public opinion.=—"we get not only an insight into the doings of
knights of the french roads of the last years of the 18th century, but
a vivid and exciting story."

=morning advertiser.=—"not only is the old story at once thrilling and
true, but it is different from the drama which sir henry irving still
keeps familiarly before the present generation, a question both of
personal justice and of a point of law that renders the book as
important as it is sure to be popular."

=pentonville from within.= with an actress in the background. by
e.b.p. crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=the cynic's posy.= epigrams written and compiled by g. f. monkshood.
foolscap 8vo, cloth, handmade paper, 2s. net.

=smith of the shamrock guards=: the "ragged" lieutenant. by "officer."
crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.

this play was intended for production at a west end theatre, but the
performance could not be given, as the lord chamberlain twice refused
his license, owing to the piece containing references to the "ragging"
cases.

=the ballad of the soul's desire.= a poem by vernon nott. crown 8vo,
cloth, 2s. 6d. net.

=northern whig.=—"the language in places rises to a high standard of
power and eloquence.... there are ideas too, as well as language in
this striking allegory, and, if it be the author's first work, we may
expect to hear of him again."

=glasgow herald.=—"the style and quality of the poem will appeal to
the imagination of readers who love ballads for simplicity."

=the play pictorial.= vols. i and ii. 4to, green and white cloth,
richly gilt, 6s. nett each.

each volume contains six plays, fully illustrated by fine engravings
from photographs especially taken. "the play pictorial" is a book
original in form and artistic in design, and the volumes form really
splendid gift books.

=the playgoer.= vols. i, ii, and iii. cloth, 5s. nett each.

"the playgoer" is an illustrated record of the theatrical world.

popular fiction.

[illustration]

=the adventures of mr. topham: comedian.= by c. ranger-gull (author of
"the hypocrite," "back to lilac land," "the serf," &c.) cr. 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d. illustrated by frank reynolds.

=pall mall gazette.=—"mr. ranger-gull has achieved a really remarkable
success.... the whole book goes with an air and a swing that make it
excellent reading."

=sunday times.=—"mr. ranger-gull may be sincerely congratulated on his
newest book.... in language simple and eloquent and without one
unnecessary word, mr. ranger-gull tells what befel an actor whose
identity is not easily identified.... the best advice we can give to
all who are interested in things "theatric," is to get and read this
admirably written book at once."

=his grace's grace.= a novel by c. ranger-gull (author of "the serf,"
"back to lilac land," "the hypocrite," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=standard.=—"mr. ranger-gull is very clever. he can write well, even
brilliantly.... mr. ranger-gull opens his story vigorously, and his
good spirits never flag. the book is brim-full of cleverness."

=sketch.=—"the novel is well constructed and brightly written. the
reader will have only himself to blame if he does not get some good
hearty laughs."

=free lance.=—"a lively, brilliantly written book, full of wit and
humour and epigram, sparkling from cover to cover is mr. ranger-gull's
latest novel, ‘his grace's grace.'... there are pages of smart
dialogue which are equal to the best of almost any modern english
writer."

=bookman.=—"we have some charming comedy—a double love interest and
some clever characterisation. a book which is altogether clever and
entertaining throughout."

=the love thirst of elaine.= by s. j. adair fitz-gerald (author of
"fame the fiddler," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=when it was dark.= by guy thorne (author of "the oven," &c.) crown
8vo, cloth, 6s.

=a tragic contract.= by mount houmas. crown 8vo., cloth, 6s.

=scotsman.=—"a story that carries the reader easily along with it by
the vivacity of its movement. it is written with a pleasant animation
which should not fail to afford enjoyment."

=glasgow herald.=—"the book evinces strength of conception, and vigour
and grace of elaboration, of which, presumably, more will presently be
heard."

=dundee courier.=—"the book is a delightful one. it is a dramatic
tale, well told, and is to be highly commended."

=king philip the gay.= by reginald turner (author of "the comedy of
progress," "the steeple," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=the steeple.= a novel by reginald turner (author of "the comedy of
progress," and "cynthia's damages.") crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=the times.=—"few readers who take it up will readily lay it down....
mr. turner is successful, and his sketches of men, women, and creeds
are, generally speaking, humorous, shrewd, and suggestive."

=observer.=—"a very well told story; the characters are drawn with
much freshness and clearness of delineation.... bright and lively
without being flippant. mr. turner's story is decidedly entertaining
and well written, and will probably be popular."

=outlook.=—"a purposeful story altogether out of the common ruck. it
is both daring and convincing. the portrait of frank lester is surely
as coolly relentless a thing as has been done for a long time.... it
is excellently and pitilessly done.... we would quote some contingent
excellencies. the chief, perhaps, is mr. turner's dash in carrying off
an extravagant situation.... his, also, is the gift of broad, almost
farcical characterisation. and to these must be added a brisk turn in
narrative, of which scarce a page lacks shining example."

=mrs. evelyn's husbands.= by the comtesse de bremont (author of
"daughters of pleasure," "a son of africa," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth,
6s.

=wolves.= a novel by robt. h. sherard. crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=the marquis catilini.= a novel by rowland strong. crown 8vo, cloth,
6s.

=the jewel sowers.= by an anonymous author. crown 8vo., cloth, 6s.

=mary of magdala.= by edgar saltus (author of "mr. incoul's
misadventure," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.

=mr. incoul's misadventure.= a novel by edgar saltus. crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s.

=morning post.=—"an undeniably powerful work."

mr. douglas sladen in the =queen= says:—"it is admirably written. he
(mr. saltus) is the most blasé of writers, but one of the best in
style. he is so terse that he can put a whole scene before you in a
few lines.... his epigrams and phrases are simply admirable.... ‘mr.
incoul's misadventure' is a very powerful book."

=jim blackwood: jockey.= by victor mandelstamm (translated by reginald
bacchus). crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=morcar.= an historical tale by thomas scott. crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=the light in dend's wood= and other stories. by thomas dagless. crown
8vo. cloth, 2s.

=the danger of innocence.= a novel by cosmo hamilton (author of "the
glamour of the impossible," "indiscretions," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth,
6s.

=world.=—"a very sprightly and entertaining volume."

=sunday special.=—"the author boldly depicts, under obvious
pseudonyms, several well-known, even notorious persons. he has a
bitter pen, and this book is sure to be read,—especially by the
victims.... ‘the danger of innocence' is certain to be popular with
the ‘smart' set."

=daily express.=—"a lively and diverting volume. written in a
satirically humourous vein. the book admirably succeeds in keeping the
reader interested and amused throughout."

=free lance.=—"it contains pages of screamingly funny description of
well-known society characters and their ways, their talk, and their
attitudes, their slang, and their inanities. of course, the burlesque
is somewhat highly coloured, as necessarily it had to be, in order to
produce the spontaneous loud laughter at which the author clearly
aims. this is unquestionably most amusing; one of those rare ones
which make you laugh aloud even when you are reading it to yourself
alone."

=portalone.= a cornish story by c. ranger-gull (author of "the
hypocrite," "back to lilac land," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

(_in preparation_).

=paul.= a story of the life, trials, and travels of st. paul. by guy
thorne (author of "when it was dark," "the oven," &c.) crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s.

(_in preparation_).

=the canon's butterfly.= a novel by max baring (author of "the
troubles of a shovel hat," &c.) crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

a popular american novel.

=the day of prosperity.= a vision of the century to come, by paul
devinne. crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=daily telegraph.=—"it is a clever story, with some strikingly novel
views on political and social economy, and contains much genuine
reflection and foresight."

=out of the past.= stories of the ancient east by h. g. f. spurrell.
crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.

=athenæum.=—"the stories—three in number—are concerned with the
horrors and splendours of the mighty monarchies which shared, in
ancient days, the dominion of the east, pre-roman and pre-mohammedan.
it must be said he (mr. spurrell) has painted a bold picture in lurid
colours; like the art of assyria, its bulls and lions, it is splendid
and impressive."

=scotsman.=—"full of life and incident, there are events recorded of a
nature that simply appals. will be read with great interest. the
writer knows his subject thoroughly, and writes well, and with
dramatic effect."

=literary world.=—"the scenes are placed in the very far-distant past,
when nineveh and babylon were still unbuilt, and in the ‘baratarias'
of the ancient world. there is some reminiscence of the arabian nights
in them, and in barbaric splendour and reckless bloodshed they rival
the productions of mr. rider haggard. as pictures of what may have
been, they are replete with excitement and incident. mr. spurrell
writes well."

=british weekly.=—"‘out of the past' takes us into the changeless
east. the author wears a magic veil, he sleeps and awakes with
wondrous oriental romances in his brain. they are wild and full of
terrors, but they are fruits of a brisk imagination."

=a heroine of reality.= a novel by percy vincent donovan. crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s.

=literary world.=—"written in an attractive style. the description of
swiss scenery is carefully done, and the story as a whole will be read
with interest."

=vanity fair.=—"the story is briskly and effectively told."

=to-day.=—"picturesquely staged amid the mountains and valleys of
switzerland. the interest of this powerful story is centred in an
unhappy middle-aged woman's taint of drunkenness, and this secret vice
forms the pivot around which the love story of three men for her
daughter revolves. the characters are well drawn, and distinctly more
human than those one is accustomed to meet in the average novel."

=daily despatch.=—"the book abounds in many fine situations. it is an
interesting though daring novel."

=the ice maiden.= a society novel by "lady frivol." crown 8vo, cloth,
3s. 6d.

=whitehall review.=—"the writer has a very pretty gift of character
drawing. the characters of the vain and flimsy society women are drawn
with care, knowledge, and vigour."

=glasgow herald.=—"this tale abounds in romantic sentiment, and in
delineations of smart society."

=free lance.=—"a strange and lively tale."

=liverpool courier.=—"a society story on daringly original lines.... a
charming story of modern fashionable life. the book abounds in
unexpected situations, some of which are keenly humourous, and the
different characters talk like men and women."

=daily express.=—"smart repartee and scathing conclusions on the ways
and manners of modern society life."

=british weekly.=—"a lively love story."

=the staff in flower.= a novel by an anonymous writer. crown 8vo,
cloth, 6s.

=bookman.=—"it has, what so many novels have not, a definite purpose
and a bold originality of outlook. it is a book which makes one
curious to know who wrote it."

=morning leader.=—"written with undoubted strength and thought, and
vigour of language."

=christian world.=—"a story which, despite some boldness, is strong
and original."

=lloyd's news.=—"it is a distinctly clever book, with many fine
passages in it, and reading it is anything but a tiring task."

=scotsman.=—"striking incidents in a wasted, miserable life are
related in this story.... a singularly tragic incident brings to a
close a story in which there is a curious admixture of the humorous
and the pathetic."

=the world.=—"the vigour and boldness, recklessness indeed, with which
theories are advanced, conclusions are rather wrenched than drawn, and
flung at the reader's head, give the book an attraction."

popular sixpenny editions

=the cry in the night.= 6d.

by arnold golsworthy ("jingle" of "pick-me-up.")

=the angel of the chimes.= 6d.

by fortuné du boisgobey.

=the convict colonel.= 6d.

by fortuné du boisgobey.

=jack sheppard.= 6d.

by w. harrison ainsworth.

=dick turpin=; or "rookwood." 6d.

by w. harrison ainsworth.

=drink= (l'assommoir). 6d.

by emile zola.

=dan leno: hys book.= 6d.

written by dan leno.

=daughters of pleasure.= 6d.

by anne comtesse de bremont, author of "a son of africa," "the
gentleman digger," &c.

=the pottle papers.= 6d.

written by saul smiff. illustrated by l. raven hill.

=seven nights with satan.= 6d.

by j. l. owen, author of "the great jekyl diamond."

=in monte carlo.= 6d.

by henryk sienkiewicz, author of "quo vadis?"

=sapho.= 6d. by alphonse daudet.

=some legends of the fells.= 6d.

by c. barlow-massicks.

=the adventures of ulysses.= 6d.

by c. ranger-gull.

complete illustrated catalogue post free on application.



transcriber's notes

1. silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
2. archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
3. enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
4. enclosed bold font in =equals=.

distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net

the piebald hippogriff

by karen anderson

[transcriber's note: this etext was produced from fantastic stories
of imagination may 1962. extensive research did not uncover any
evidence that the u.s. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

_because this is a masculine world, the author of this fairytale is
usually identified as the wife of poul anderson. but a few more
incisive cameos of fantasy such as this, and mr. anderson may come
to be identified as karen's husband._

the edge of the world is fenced off stoutly enough, but the fence isn't
made that will stop a boy. johnny tossed his pack and coil of rope over
it and started climbing. the top three strands were barbed wire. he
caught his shirt as he went over, and had to stop for a moment to ease
himself off. then he dropped lightly to the grass on the other side.

the pack had landed in a clump of white clover. a cloud of disturbed
bees hung above, and he snatched it away quickly lest they should notice
the honeycomb inside.

for a minute he stood still, looking out over the edge. this was
different from looking through the fence, and when he moved it was
slowly. he eased himself to the ground where a corner of rock rose clear
of the thick larkspur and lay on his belly, the stone hard and cool
under his chin, and looked down.

the granite cliff curved away out of sight, and he couldn't see if it
had a foot. he saw only endless blue, beyond, below, and on both sides.
clouds passed slowly.

directly beneath him there was a ledge covered with long grass where
clusters of stars bloomed on tall, slender stalks.

he uncoiled his rope and found a stout beech tree not too close to the
edge. doubling the rope around the bole, he tied one end around his
waist, slung the pack on his back, and belayed himself down the cliff.
pebbles clattered, saxifrage brushed his arms and tickled his ears; once
he groped for a hold with his face in a patch of rustling ferns.

the climb was hard, but not too much. less than half an hour later he
was stretched out on the grass with stars nodding about him. they had a
sharp, gingery smell. he lay in the cool shadow of the world's edge for
a while, eating apples and honeycomb from his pack. when he was finished
he licked the honey off his fingers and threw the apple cores over,
watching them fall into the blue.

little islands floated along, rocking gently in air eddies. sunlight
flashed on glossy leaves of bushes growing there. when an island drifted
into the shadow of the cliff, the blossoming stars shone out. beyond the
shadows, deep in the light-filled gulf, he saw the hippogriffs at play.

*       *       *       *       *

there were dozens of them, frisking and cavorting in the air. he gazed
at them full of wonder. they pretended to fight, stooped at one another,
soared off in long spirals to stoop and soar and stoop again. one
flashed by him, a golden palomino that shone like polished wood. the
wind whistled in its wings.

away to the left, the cliff fell back in a wide crescent, and nearly
opposite him a river tumbled over the edge. a pool on a ledge beneath
caught most of the water, and there were hippogriffs drinking. one side
of the broad pool was notched. the overflow fell sheer in a white plume
blown sideways by the wind.

as the sun grew hotter, the hippogriffs began to settle and browse on
the islands that floated past. not far below, he noticed, a dozen or so
stood drowsily on an island that was floating through the cliff's shadow
toward his ledge. it would pass directly below him.

with a sudden resolution, johnny jerked his rope down from the tree
above and tied the end to a projecting knob on the cliff. slinging on
his pack again, he slid over the edge and down the rope.

the island was already passing. the end of the rope trailed through the
grass. he slithered down and cut a piece off his line.

it was barely long enough after he had tied a noose in the end. he
looked around at the hippogriffs. they had shied away when he dropped
onto the island, but now they stood still, watching him warily.

johnny started to take an apple out of his pack, then changed his mind
and took a piece of honeycomb. he broke off one corner and tossed it
toward them. they fluttered their wings and backed off a few steps, then
stood still again.

johnny sat down to wait. they were mostly chestnuts and blacks, and some
had white stockings. one was piebald. that was the one which, after a
while, began edging closer to where the honeycomb had fallen. johnny sat
very still.

*       *       *       *       *

the piebald sniffed at the honeycomb, then jerked up its head to watch
him suspiciously. he didn't move. after a moment it took the honeycomb.

when he threw another bit, the piebald hippogriff wheeled away, but
returned almost at once and ate it. johnny tossed a third piece only a
few yards from where he was sitting.

it was bigger than the others, and the hippogriff had to bite it in two.
when the hippogriff bent its head to take the rest johnny was on his
feet instantly, swinging his lariat. he dropped the noose over the
hippogriff's head. for a moment the animal was too startled to do
anything; then johnny was on its back, clinging tight.

the piebald hippogriff leaped into the air, and johnny clamped his legs
about convulsed muscles. pinions whipped against his knees and wind
blasted his eyes. the world tilted; they were rushing downward. his
knees pressed the sockets of the enormous wings.

the distant ramparts of the world swung madly, and he seemed to fall
upward, away from the sun that suddenly glared under the hippogriff's
talons. he forced his knees under the roots of the beating wings and dug
heels into prickling hair. a sob caught his breath and he clenched his
teeth.

the universe righted itself about him for a moment and he pulled breath
into his lungs. then they plunged again. wind searched under his shirt.
once he looked down. after that he kept his eyes on the flutter of the
feather-mane.

*       *       *       *       *

a jolt sent him sliding backward. he clutched the rope with slippery
fingers. the wings missed a beat and the hippogriff shook its head as
the rope momentarily checked its breath. it tried to fly straight up,
lost way, and fell stiff-winged. the long muscles stretched under him as
it arched its back, then bunched when it kicked straight out behind. the
violence loosened his knees and he trembled with fatigue, but he wound
the rope around his wrists and pressed his forehead against whitened
knuckles. another kick, and another. johnny dragged at the rope.

the tense wings flailed, caught air, and brought the hippogriff upright
again. the rope slackened and he heard huge gasps. sunlight was hot on
him again and a drop of sweat crawled down his temple. it tickled. he
loosened one hand to dab at the annoyance. a new twist sent him sliding
and he grabbed the rope. the tickle continued until he nearly screamed.
he no longer dared let go. another tickle developed beside the first. he
scrubbed his face against the coarse fibre of the rope; the relief was
like a world conquered.

then they glided in a steady spiral that carried them upward with
scarcely a feather's motion. when the next plunge came johnny was ready
for it and leaned back until the hippogriff arched its neck, trying to
free itself from the pressure on its windpipe. half choked, it glided
again, and johnny gave it breath.

they landed on one of the little islands. the hippogriff drooped its
head and wings, trembling.

he took another piece of honeycomb from his pack and tossed it to the
ground where the hippogriff could reach it easily. while it ate he
stroked it and talked to it. when he dismounted the hippogriff took
honeycomb from his hand. he stroked its neck, breathing the sweet warm
feathery smell, and laughed aloud when it snuffled the back of his neck.

tying the rope into a sort of hackamore, he mounted again and rode the
hippogriff to the pool below the thunder and cold spray of the
waterfall. he took care that it did not drink too much. when he ate some
apples for his lunch, the hippogriff ate the cores.

afterward he rode to one of the drifting islands and let his mount
graze. for a while he kept by its side, making much of it. with his
fingers, he combed out the soft flowing plumes of its mane, and examined
its hoofs and the sickle-like talons of the forelegs. he saw how the
smooth feathers on its forequarters became finer and finer until he
could scarcely see where the hair on the hindquarters began. delicate
feathers covered its head.

the island glided further and further away from the cliffs, and he
watched the waterfall dwindle away to a streak and disappear. after a
while he fell asleep.

*       *       *       *       *

he woke with a start, suddenly cold: the setting sun was below his
island. the feathery odor was still on his hands. he looked around for
the hippogriff and saw it sniffing at his pack.

when it saw him move, it trotted up to him with an expectant air. he
threw his arms about the great flat-muscled neck and pressed his face
against the warm feathers, with a faint sense of embarrassment at
feeling tears in his eyes.

"good old patch," he said, and got his pack. he shared the last piece of
honeycomb with his hippogriff and watched the sun sink still further.
the clouds were turning red.

"let's go see those clouds," johnny said. he mounted the piebald
hippogriff and they flew off, up through the golden air to the sunset
clouds. there they stopped and johnny dismounted on the highest cloud of
all, stood there as it turned slowly gray, and looked into dimming
depths. when he turned to look at the world, he saw only a wide smudge
of darkness spread in the distance.

the cloud they were standing on turned silver. johnny glanced up and saw
the moon, a crescent shore far above.

he ate an apple and gave one to his hippogriff. while he chewed he gazed
back at the world. when he finished his apple, he was about to toss the
core to the hippogriff, but stopped himself and carefully took out the
seeds first. with the seeds in his pocket, he mounted again.

he took a deep breath. "come on, patch," he said. "let's homestead the
moon."

the end

end of project gutenberg's the piebald hippogriff, by karen anderson

distributed proofreading team at https://www.pgdp.net

_we have said that there are many and strange shadows, memories
surviving from dim pasts, in this fantastic universe of ours. poul
anderson turns to a legend from the northern countries, countries
where even today the pagan past seems only like yesterday, and tells
the story of cappen varra, who came to norren a long, long time
ago._

the
valor
of
cappen
varra

by ... _poul anderson_

"let little cappen go," they
shouted. "maybe he can sing
the trolls to sleep--"

the wind came from the north with sleet on its back. raw shuddering
gusts whipped the sea till the ship lurched and men felt driven
spindrift stinging their faces. beyond the rail there was winter night,
a moving blackness where the waves rushed and clamored; straining into
the great dark, men sensed only the bitter salt of sea-scud, the nettle
of sleet and the lash of wind.

cappen lost his footing as the ship heaved beneath him, his hands were
yanked from the icy rail and he went stumbling to the deck. the bilge
water was new coldness on his drenched clothes. he struggled back to his
feet, leaning on a rower's bench and wishing miserably that his quaking
stomach had more to lose. but he had already chucked his share of
stockfish and hardtack, to the laughter of svearek's men, when the gale
started.

numb fingers groped anxiously for the harp on his back. it still seemed
intact in its leather case. he didn't care about the sodden wadmal
breeks and tunic that hung around his skin. the sooner they rotted off
him, the better. the thought of the silks and linens of croy was a sigh
in him.

why had he come to norren?

a gigantic form, vague in the whistling dark, loomed beside him and gave
him a steadying hand. he could barely hear the blond giant's bull tones:
"ha, easy there, lad. methinks the sea horse road is too rough for yer
feet."

"ulp," said cappen. his slim body huddled on the bench, too miserable to
care. the sleet pattered against his shoulders and the spray congealed
in his red hair.

torbek of norren squinted into the night. it made his leathery face a
mesh of wrinkles. "a bitter feast yolner we hold," he said. "'twas a
madness of the king's, that he would guest with his brother across the
water. now the other ships are blown from us and the fire is drenched
out and we lie alone in the wolf's throat."

wind piped shrill in the rigging. cappen could just see the longboat's
single mast reeling against the sky. the ice on the shrouds made it a
pale pyramid. ice everywhere, thick on the rails and benches, sheathing
the dragon head and the carved stern-post, the ship rolling and
staggering under the great march of waves, men bailing and bailing in
the half-frozen bilge to keep her afloat, and too much wind for sail or
oars. yes--a cold feast!

"but then, svearek has been strange since the troll took his daughter,
three years ago," went on torbek. he shivered in a way the winter had
not caused. "never does he smile, and his once open hand grasps tight
about the silver and his men have poor reward and no thanks. yes,
strange--" his small frost-blue eyes shifted to cappen varra, and the
unspoken thought ran on beneath them: strange, even, that he likes you,
the wandering bard from the south. strange, that he will have you in his
hall when you cannot sing as his men would like.

cappen did not care to defend himself. he had drifted up toward the
northern barbarians with the idea that they would well reward a minstrel
who could offer them something more than their own crude chants. it had
been a mistake; they didn't care for roundels or sestinas, they yawned
at the thought of roses white and red under the moon of caronne, a moon
less fair than my lady's eyes. nor did a man of croy have the size and
strength to compel their respect; cappen's light blade flickered swiftly
enough so that no one cared to fight him, but he lacked the power of
sheer bulk. svearek alone had enjoyed hearing him sing, but he was
niggardly and his brawling thorp was an endless boredom to a man used to
the courts of southern princes.

if he had but had the manhood to leave-- but he had delayed, because of
a lusty peasant wench and a hope that svearek's coffers would open
wider; and now he was dragged along over the wolf's throat to a
midwinter feast which would have to be celebrated on the sea.

"had we but fire--" torbek thrust his hands inside his cloak, trying to
warm them a little. the ship rolled till she was almost on her beam
ends; torbek braced himself with practiced feet, but cappen went into
the bilge again.

he sprawled there for a while, his bruised body refusing movement. a
weary sailor with a bucket glared at him through dripping hair. his
shout was dim under the hoot and skirl of wind: "if ye like it so well
down here, then help us bail!"

"'tis not yet my turn," groaned cappen, and got slowly up.

the wave which had nearly swamped them had put out the ship's fire and
drenched the wood beyond hope of lighting a new one. it was cold fish
and sea-sodden hardtack till they saw land again--if they ever did.

as cappen raised himself on the leeward side, he thought he saw
something gleam, far out across the wrathful night. a wavering red
spark-- he brushed a stiffened hand across his eyes, wondering if the
madness of wind and water had struck through into his own skull. a gust
of sleet hid it again. but--

he fumbled his way aft between the benches. huddled figures cursed him
wearily as he stepped on them. the ship shook herself, rolled along the
edge of a boiling black trough, and slid down into it; for an instant,
the white teeth of combers grinned above her rail, and cappen waited for
an end to all things. then she mounted them again, somehow, and wallowed
toward another valley.

king svearek had the steering oar and was trying to hold the longboat
into the wind. he had stood there since sundown, huge and untiring, legs
braced and the bucking wood cradled in his arms. more than human he
seemed, there under the icicle loom of the stern-post, his gray hair and
beard rigid with ice. beneath the horned helmet, the strong moody face
turned right and left, peering into the darkness. cappen felt smaller
than usual when he approached the steersman.

he leaned close to the king, shouting against the blast of winter: "my
lord, did i not see firelight?"

"aye. i spied it an hour ago," grunted the king. "been trying to steer
us a little closer to it."

cappen nodded, too sick and weary to feel reproved. "what is it?"

"some island--there are many in this stretch of water--now shut up!"

cappen crouched down under the rail and waited.

the lonely red gleam seemed nearer when he looked again. svearek's tones
were lifting in a roar that hammered through the gale from end to end of
the ship: "hither! come hither to me, all men not working!"

slowly, they groped to him, great shadowy forms in wool and leather,
bulking over cappen like storm-gods. svearek nodded toward the
flickering glow. "one of the islands, somebody must be living there. i
cannot bring the ship closer for fear of surf, but one of ye should be
able to take the boat thither and fetch us fire and dry wood. who will
go?"

they peered overside, and the uneasy movement that ran among them came
from more than the roll and pitch of the deck underfoot.

beorna the bold spoke at last, it was hardly to be heard in the noisy
dark: "i never knew of men living hereabouts. it must be a lair of
trolls."

"aye, so ... aye, they'd but eat the man we sent ... out oars, let's
away from here though it cost our lives ..." the frightened mumble was
low under the jeering wind.

svearek's face drew into a snarl. "are ye men or puling babes? hack yer
way through them, if they be trolls, but bring me fire!"

"even a she-troll is stronger than fifty men, my king," cried torbek.
"well ye know that, when the monster woman broke through our guards
three years ago and bore off hildigund."

"enough!" it was a scream in svearek's throat. "i'll have yer craven
heads for this, all of ye, if ye gang not to the isle!"

they looked at each other, the big men of norren, and their shoulders
hunched bear-like. it was beorna who spoke it for them: "no, that ye
will not. we are free housecarls, who will fight for a leader--but not
for a madman."

cappen drew back against the rail, trying to make himself small.

"all gods turn their faces from ye!" it was more than weariness and
despair which glared in svearek's eyes, there was something of death in
them. "i'll go myself, then!"

"no, my king. that we will not find ourselves in."

"i am the king!"

"and we are yer housecarls, sworn to defend ye--even from yerself. ye
shall not go."

the ship rolled again, so violently that they were all thrown to
starboard. cappen landed on torbek, who reached up to shove him aside
and then closed one huge fist on his tunic.

"here's our man!"

"hi!" yelled cappen.

torbek hauled him roughly back to his feet. "ye cannot row or bail yer
fair share," he growled, "nor do ye know the rigging or any skill of a
sailor--'tis time ye made yerself useful!"

"aye, aye--let little cappen go--mayhap he can sing the trolls to
sleep--" the laughter was hard and barking, edged with fear, and they
all hemmed him in.

"my lord!" bleated the minstrel. "i am your guest--"

svearek laughed unpleasantly, half crazily. "sing them a song," he
howled. "make a fine roun--whatever ye call it--to the troll-wife's
beauty. and bring us some fire, little man, bring us a flame less hot
than the love in yer breast for yer lady!"

teeth grinned through matted beards. someone hauled on the rope from
which the ship's small boat trailed, dragging it close. "go, ye scut!" a
horny hand sent cappen stumbling to the rail.

he cried out once again. an ax lifted above his head. someone handed him
his own slim sword, and for a wild moment he thought of fighting.
useless--too many of them. he buckled on the sword and spat at the men.
the wind tossed it back in his face, and they raved with laughter.

over the side! the boat rose to meet him, he landed in a heap on
drenched planks and looked up into the shadowy faces of the northmen.
there was a sob in his throat as he found the seat and took out the
oars.

an awkward pull sent him spinning from the ship, and then the night had
swallowed it and he was alone. numbly, he bent to the task. unless he
wanted to drown, there was no place to go but the island.

he was too weary and ill to be much afraid, and such fear as he had was
all of the sea. it could rise over him, gulp him down, the gray horses
would gallop over him and the long weeds would wrap him when he rolled
dead against some skerry. the soft vales of caronne and the roses in
croy's gardens seemed like a dream. there was only the roar and boom of
the northern sea, hiss of sleet and spindrift, crazed scream of wind, he
was alone as man had ever been and he would go down to the sharks alone.

the boat wallowed, but rode the waves better than the longship. he grew
dully aware that the storm was pushing him toward the island. it was
becoming visible, a deeper blackness harsh against the night.

he could not row much in the restless water, he shipped the oars and
waited for the gale to capsize him and fill his mouth with the sea. and
when it gurgled in his throat, what would his last thought be? should he
dwell on the lovely image of ydris in seilles, she of the long bright
hair and the singing voice? but then there had been the tomboy laughter
of dark falkny, he could not neglect her. and there were memories of
elvanna in her castle by the lake, and sirann of the hundred rings, and
beauteous vardry, and hawk-proud lona, and-- no, he could not do justice
to any of them in the little time that remained. what a pity it was!

no, wait, that unforgettable night in nienne, the beauty which had
whispered in his ear and drawn him close, the hair which had fallen like
a silken tent about his cheeks ... ah, that had been the summit of his
life, he would go down into darkness with her name on his lips ... but
hell! what _had_ her name been, now?

cappen varra, minstrel of croy, clung to the bench and sighed.

the great hollow voice of surf lifted about him, waves sheeted across
the gunwale and the boat danced in madness. cappen groaned, huddling
into the circle of his own arms and shaking with cold. swiftly, now, the
end of all sunlight and laughter, the dark and lonely road which all men
must tread. _o ilwarra of syr, aedra in tholis, could i but kiss you
once more--_

stones grated under the keel. it was a shock like a sword going through
him. cappen looked unbelievingly up. the boat had drifted to land--he
was alive!

it was like the sun in his breast. weariness fell from him, and he
leaped overside, not feeling the chill of the shallows. with a grunt, he
heaved the boat up on the narrow strand and knotted the painter to a
fang-like jut of reef.

then he looked about him. the island was small, utterly bare, a savage
loom of rock rising out of the sea that growled at its feet and streamed
off its shoulders. he had come into a little cliff-walled bay, somewhat
sheltered from the wind. he was here!

for a moment he stood, running through all he had learned about the
trolls which infested these northlands. hideous and soulless dwellers
underground, they knew not old age; a sword could hew them asunder, but
before it reached their deep-seated life, their unhuman strength had
plucked a man apart. then they ate him--

small wonder the northmen feared them. cappen threw back his head and
laughed. he had once done a service for a mighty wizard in the south,
and his reward hung about his neck, a small silver amulet. the wizard
had told him that no supernatural being could harm anyone who carried a
piece of silver.

the northmen said that a troll was powerless against a man who was not
afraid; but, of course, only to see one was to feel the heart turn to
ice. they did not know the value of silver, it seemed--odd that they
shouldn't, but they did not. because cappen varra did, he had no reason
to be afraid; therefore he was doubly safe, and it was but a matter of
talking the troll into giving him some fire. if indeed there was a troll
here, and not some harmless fisherman.

he whistled gaily, wrung some of the water from his cloak and ruddy
hair, and started along the beach. in the sleety gloom, he could just
see a hewn-out path winding up one of the cliffs and he set his feet on
it.

at the top of the path, the wind ripped his whistling from his lips. he
hunched his back against it and walked faster, swearing as he stumbled
on hidden rocks. the ice-sheathed ground was slippery underfoot, and the
cold bit like a knife.

rounding a crag, he saw redness glow in the face of a steep bluff. a
cave mouth, a fire within--he hastened his steps, hungering for warmth,
until he stood in the entrance.

"_who comes?_"

it was a hoarse bass cry that rang and boomed between walls of rock;
there was ice and horror in it, for a moment cappen's heart stumbled.
then he remembered the amulet and strode boldly inside.

"good evening, mother," he said cheerily.

the cave widened out into a stony hugeness that gaped with tunnels
leading further underground. the rough, soot-blackened walls were hung
with plundered silks and cloth-of-gold, gone ragged with age and damp;
the floor was strewn with stinking rushes, and gnawed bones were heaped
in disorder. cappen saw the skulls of men among them. in the center of
the room, a great fire leaped and blazed, throwing billows of heat
against him; some of its smoke went up a hole in the roof, the rest
stung his eyes to watering and he sneezed.

the troll-wife crouched on the floor, snarling at him. she was quite the
most hideous thing cappen had ever seen: nearly as tall as he, she was
twice as broad and thick, and the knotted arms hung down past bowed
knees till their clawed fingers brushed the ground. her head was
beast-like, almost split in half by the tusked mouth, the eyes wells of
darkness, the nose an ell long; her hairless skin was green and cold,
moving on her bones. a tattered shift covered some of her monstrousness,
but she was still a nightmare.

"ho-ho, ho-ho!" her laughter roared out, hungry and hollow as the surf
around the island. slowly, she shuffled closer. "so my dinner comes
walking in to greet me, ho, ho, ho! welcome, sweet flesh, welcome, good
marrow-filled bones, come in and be warmed."

"why, thank you, good mother." cappen shucked his cloak and grinning at
her through the smoke. he felt his clothes steaming already. "i love you
too."

over her shoulder, he suddenly saw the girl. she was huddled in a
corner, wrapped in fear, but the eyes that watched him were as blue as
the skies over caronne. the ragged dress did not hide the gentle curves
of her body, nor did the tear-streaked grime spoil the lilt of her face.
"why, 'tis springtime in here," cried cappen, "and primavera herself is
strewing flowers of love."

"what are you talking about, crazy man?" rumbled the troll-wife. she
turned to the girl. "heap the fire, hildigund, and set up the roasting
spit. tonight i feast!"

"truly i see heaven in female form before me," said cappen.

the troll scratched her misshapen head.

"you must surely be from far away, moonstruck man," she said.

"aye, from golden croy am i wandered, drawn over dolorous seas and empty
wild lands by the fame of loveliness waiting here; and now that i have
seen you, my life is full." cappen was looking at the girl as he spoke,
but he hoped the troll might take it as aimed her way.

"it will be fuller," grinned the monster. "stuffed with hot coals while
yet you live." she glanced back at the girl. "what, are you not working
yet, you lazy tub of lard? set up the spit, i said!"

the girl shuddered back against a heap of wood. "no," she whispered. "i
cannot--not ... not for a man."

"can and will, my girl," said the troll, picking up a bone to throw at
her. the girl shrieked a little.

"no, no, sweet mother. i would not be so ungallant as to have beauty
toil for me." cappen plucked at the troll's filthy dress. "it is not
meet--in two senses. i only came to beg a little fire; yet will i bear
away a greater fire within my heart."

"fire in your guts, you mean! no man ever left me save as picked bones."

cappen thought he heard a worried note in the animal growl. "shall we
have music for the feast?" he asked mildly. he unslung the case of his
harp and took it out.

the troll-wife waved her fists in the air and danced with rage. "are you
mad? i tell you, you are going to be eaten!"

the minstrel plucked a string on his harp. "this wet air has played the
devil with her tone," he murmured sadly.

the troll-wife roared wordlessly and lunged at him. hildigund covered
her eyes. cappen tuned his harp. a foot from his throat, the claws
stopped.

"pray do not excite yourself, mother," said the bard. "i carry silver,
you know."

"what is that to me? if you think you have a charm which will turn me,
know that there is none. i've no fear of your metal!"

cappen threw back his head and sang:

"_a lovely lady full oft lies.
the light that lies within her eyes
and lies and lies, in no surprise.
all her unkindness can devise
to trouble hearts that seek the prize
which is herself, are angel lies--_"

"_aaaarrrgh!_" it was like thunder drowning him out. the troll-wife
turned and went on all fours and poked up the fire with her nose.

cappen stepped softly around her and touched the girl. she looked up
with a little whimper.

"you are svearek's only daughter, are you not?" he whispered.

"aye--" she bowed her head, a strengthless despair weighting it down.
"the troll stole me away three winters agone. it has tickled her to have
a princess for slave--but soon i will roast on her spit, even as ye,
brave man--"

"ridiculous. so fair a lady is meant for another kind of, um, never
mind! has she treated you very ill?"

"she beats me now and again--and i have been so lonely, naught here at
all save the troll-wife and i--" the small work-roughened hands clutched
desperately at his waist, and she buried her face against his breast.

"can ye save us?" she gasped. "i fear 'tis for naught ye ventured yer
life, bravest of men. i fear we'll soon both sputter on the coals."

cappen said nothing. if she wanted to think he had come especially to
rescue her, he would not be so ungallant to tell her otherwise.

the troll-wife's mouth gashed in a grin as she walked through the fire
to him. "there is a price," she said. "if you cannot tell me three
things about myself which are true beyond disproving, not courage nor
amulet nor the gods themselves may avail to keep that red head on your
shoulders."

cappen clapped a hand to his sword. "why, gladly," he said; this was a
rule of magic he had learned long ago, that three truths were the
needful armor to make any guardian charm work. "imprimis, yours is the
ugliest nose i ever saw poking up a fire. secundus, i was never in a
house i cared less to guest at. tertius, ever among trolls you are
little liked, being one of the worst."

hildigund moaned with terror as the monster swelled in rage. but there
was no movement. only the leaping flames and the eddying smoke stirred.

cappen's voice rang out, coldly: "now the king lies on the sea, frozen
and wet, and i am come to fetch a brand for his fire. and i had best
also see his daughter home."

the troll shook her head, suddenly chuckling. "no. the brand you may
have, just to get you out of this cave, foulness; but the woman is in my
thrall until a man sleeps with her--here--for a night. and if he does, i
may have him to break my fast in the morning!"

cappen yawned mightily. "thank you, mother. your offer of a bed is most
welcome to these tired bones, and i accept gratefully."

"you will die tomorrow!" she raved. the ground shook under the huge
weight of her as she stamped. "because of the three truths, i must let
you go tonight; but tomorrow i may do what i will!"

"forget not my little friend, mother," said cappen, and touched the cord
of the amulet.

"i tell you, silver has no use against me--"

cappen sprawled on the floor and rippled fingers across his harp. "_a
lovely lady full oft lies--_"

the troll-wife turned from him in a rage. hildigund ladled up some
broth, saying nothing, and cappen ate it with pleasure, though it could
have used more seasoning.

after that he indited a sonnet to the princess, who regarded him
wide-eyed. the troll came back from a tunnel after he finished, and said
curtly: "this way." cappen took the girl's hand and followed her into a
pitchy, reeking dark.

she plucked an arras aside to show a room which surprised him by being
hung with tapestries, lit with candles, and furnished with a fine broad
featherbed. "sleep here tonight, if you dare," she growled. "and
tomorrow i shall eat you--and you, worthless lazy she-trash, will have
the hide flayed off your back!" she barked a laugh and left them.

hildigund fell weeping on the mattress. cappen let her cry herself out
while he undressed and got between the blankets. drawing his sword, he
laid it carefully in the middle of the bed.

the girl looked at him through jumbled fair locks. "how can ye dare?"
she whispered. "one breath of fear, one moment's doubt, and the troll is
free to rend ye."

"exactly." cappen yawned. "doubtless she hopes that fear will come to me
lying wakeful in the night. wherefore 'tis but a question of going
gently to sleep. o svearek, torbek, and beorna, could you but see how i
am resting now!"

"but ... the three truths ye gave her ... how knew ye...?"

"oh, those. well, see you, sweet lady, primus and secundus were my own
thoughts, and who is to disprove them? tertius was also clear, since you
said there had been no company here in three years--yet are there many
trolls in these lands, ergo even they cannot stomach our gentle
hostess." cappen watched her through heavy-lidded eyes.

she flushed deeply, blew out the candles, and he heard her slip off her
garment and get in with him. there was a long silence.

then: "are ye not--"

"yes, fair one?" he muttered through his drowsiness.

"are ye not ... well, i am here and ye are here and--"

"fear not," he said. "i laid my sword between us. sleep in peace."

"i ... would be glad--ye have come to deliver--"

"no, fair lady. no man of gentle breeding could so abuse his power.
goodnight." he leaned over, brushing his lips gently across hers, and
lay down again.

"ye are ... i never thought man could be so noble," she whispered.

cappen mumbled something. as his soul spun into sleep, he chuckled.
those unresting days and nights on the sea had not left him fit for that
kind of exercise. but, of course, if she wanted to think he was being
magnanimous, it could be useful later--

*       *       *       *       *

he woke with a start and looked into the sputtering glare of a torch.
its light wove across the crags and gullies of the troll-wife's face and
shimmered wetly off the great tusks in her mouth.

"good morning, mother," said cappen politely.

hildigund thrust back a scream.

"come and be eaten," said the troll-wife.

"no, thank you," said cappen, regretfully but firmly. "'twould be ill
for my health. no, i will but trouble you for a firebrand and then the
princess and i will be off."

"if you think that stupid bit of silver will protect you, think again,"
she snapped. "your three sentences were all that saved you last night.
now i hunger."

"silver," said cappen didactically, "is a certain shield against all
black magics. so the wizard told me, and he was such a nice
white-bearded old man i am sure even his attendant devils never lied.
now please depart, mother, for modesty forbids me to dress before your
eyes."

the hideous face thrust close to his. he smiled dreamily and tweaked her
nose--hard.

she howled and flung the torch at him. cappen caught it and stuffed it
into her mouth. she choked and ran from the room.

"a new sport--trollbaiting," said the bard gaily into the sudden
darkness. "come, shall we not venture out?"

the girl trembled too much to move. he comforted her, absentmindedly,
and dressed in the dark, swearing at the clumsy leggings. when he left,
hildigund put on her clothes and hurried after him.

the troll-wife squatted by the fire and glared at them as they went by.
cappen hefted his sword and looked at her. "i do not love you," he said
mildly, and hewed out.

she backed away, shrieking as he slashed at her. in the end, she
crouched at the mouth of a tunnel, raging futilely. cappen pricked her
with his blade.

"it is not worth my time to follow you down underground," he said, "but
if ever you trouble men again, i will hear of it and come and feed you
to my dogs. a piece at a time--a very small piece--do you understand?"

she snarled at him.

"an _extremely_ small piece," said cappen amiably. "have you heard me?"

something broke in her. "yes," she whimpered. he let her go, and she
scuttled from him like a rat.

he remembered the firewood and took an armful; on the way, he
thoughtfully picked up a few jeweled rings which he didn't think she
would be needing and stuck them in his pouch. then he led the girl
outside.

the wind had laid itself, a clear frosty morning glittered on the sea
and the longship was a distant sliver against white-capped blueness. the
minstrel groaned. "what a distance to row! oh, well--"

*       *       *       *       *

they were at sea before hildigund spoke. awe was in the eyes that
watched him. "no man could be so brave," she murmured. "are ye a god?"

"not quite," said cappen. "no, most beautiful one, modesty grips my
tongue. 'twas but that i had the silver and was therefore proof against
her sorcery."

"but the silver was no help!" she cried.

cappen's oar caught a crab. "what?" he yelled.

"no--no--why, she told ye so her own self--"

"i thought she lied. i _know_ the silver guards against--"

"but she used no magic! trolls have but their own strength!"

cappen sagged in his seat. for a moment he thought he was going to
faint. then only his lack of fear had armored him; and if he had known
the truth, that would not have lasted a minute.

he laughed shakily. another score for his doubts about the overall value
of truth!

the longship's oars bit water and approached him. indignant voices
asking why he had been so long on his errand faded when his passenger
was seen. and svearek the king wept as he took his daughter back into
his arms.

the hard brown face was still blurred with tears when he looked at the
minstrel, but the return of his old self was there too. "what ye have
done, cappen varra of croy, is what no other man in the world could have
done."

"aye--aye--" the rough northern voices held adoration as the warriors
crowded around the slim red-haired figure.

"ye shall have her whom ye saved to wife," said svearek, "and when i die
ye shall rule all norren."

cappen swayed and clutched the rail.

three nights later he slipped away from their shore camp and turned his
face southward.

transcriber's note:

this etext was produced from _fantastic universe_ january 1957.
extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the u.s.
copyright on this publication was renewed. minor spelling and
typographical errors have been corrected without note.

end of project gutenberg's the valor of cappen varra, by poul william anderson

distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net. (this
file was produced from images generously made available
by the internet archive/canadian libraries.)

_the brass bottle_

_uniform with this volume_

cloth 2s. 6d.; paper covers, 1s. 6d. each.

plays by    arthur pinero
gilbert murray
w. e. henley & r. l. stevenson
gerhart hauptmann
edmund rostand
henrik ibsen
c. haddon chambers
robert marshall
herman heijermans
franz adam beyerlein

_london: william heinemann
21 bedford street, w.c._

_the brass bottle_

_a farcical fantastic play_

_in four acts_

_by f. anstey_

_london: william heinemann_

_mcmxi_

_copyright, 1911, london, by william heinemann_

copy of the "first night" programme at the vaudeville theatre, london

the brass bottle a farcical play in four acts by f. anstey performed for
the first time on thursday evening, september 16, 1909

*       *       *       *       *

horace ventimore              mr. laurence grossmith
professor anthony futvoye     mr. alfred bishop
fakrash-el-aamash             mr. e. holman clark
spencer pringle               mr. rudge harding
samuel wackerbath             mr. luigi lablache
rapkin                        mr. j. h. brewer
chief of caravan              mr. a. spencer
head efreet                   mr. john carey
a waiter                      mr. walter ringham
mrs. futvoye                  miss lena halliday
sylvia futvoye                miss viva birkett
mrs. rapkin                   miss mary brough
mrs. wackerbath               miss armine grace
jessie                        miss gladys storey
zobeida (principal dancing girl)
miss mabel duncan

dancers.   misses phyllis birkett, florence a. pigott, susie nainby,
dorothy beaufey, nina de leon, cynthia farnham

_synopsis of scenery_

acts i and ii

horace ventimore's rooms

_there will be an interval of two minutes after act i, and eight minutes
after act ii_

act iii

scene i. ventimore's office

scene ii. drawing-room at the futvoyes'

_there will be one minute interval between scenes i and ii, during which
the audience are requested to keep their seats. after act iii, eight
minutes._

act iv

scene i. ventimore's rooms

scene ii. "pinafore" room, savoy hotel

_there will be an interval of one minute between scenes i and ii, during
which the audience are requested to keep their seats._

the scenery painted by walter hann and son.

the play has been produced (for mr. gaston mayer) by mr. frederick kerr.

the amateur fee for each and every
representation of this play is five
guineas, payable in advance to the
author's sole agents, messrs.
samuel french, ltd., 26 southampton
street, strand, london,
w.c.

_the persons of the play_

horace ventimore (a young architect, aged 28)
professor anthony futvoye (an egyptologist, aged 60)
fakrash-el-aamash (a jinnee of the green jinn, age uncertain)
spencer pringle (an architect, aged 32)
samuel wackerbath (an auctioneer and estate agent, aged 60)
rapkin (ventimore's landlord, a retired butler, aged 55)
chief of caravan
head efreet
a waiter (at the savoy hotel)
mrs. futvoye (aged 55)
sylvia futvoye (her daughter, aged 21)
mrs. rapkin (ventimore's landlady)
mrs. wackerbath
jessie (parlour-maid at the futvoyes')
principal dancing girl
caravan slaves, musicians, efreets, dancing girls

*       *       *       *       *

_acts i and ii_

ventimore's rooms in vincent square, westminster

_act iii_

scene i. ventimore's office in great college street, westminster

scene ii. a drawing-room at the futvoyes' house in cottesmore gardens,
kensington

_act iv_

scene i. ventimore's rooms

scene ii. the "pinafore" room at the savoy hotel

the brass bottle

the first act

_the scene represents horace
ventimore's rooms in vincent
square, westminster._

_the sitting-room is simply but
artistically furnished and
decorated. walls with a
lining-paper of a pleasant green,
hung with coloured prints and
etchings. fireplace at back. down
left is a large open french window,
opening on a balcony, with a view
beyond of the open square and some
large dull-red gasometers in the
distance. above the window is a
small sheraton bookcase. on the
right of fireplace is a door
leading to the landing and
staircase. down on the right,
another door to ventimore's
bedroom. above this door, a
small sheraton sideboard. near the
window on left is an armchair, and
by it a table, with two smaller
chairs. [n.b.--right and left
mean the spectator's right and left
throughout._]

_the time is late afternoon in
summer._

_when the curtain rises there is no
one in the room. a knock is heard at
the door on right of fireplace.
then, after a pause, mrs. rapkin
enters. she is a pleasant, neatly
dressed, elderly woman, of the
respectable landlady class. she
wears a cooking-apron and her
sleeves are turned up. she looks
round the room, and turns to the
door as professor futvoye appears._

mrs. rapkin.

mr. ventimore don't seem to be in, after all, sir. unless he's in his
bedroom. [_she comes down to the door on right, as professor, mrs., and
miss futvoye enter from the other door. professor futvoye is elderly and
crabbed; his wife, grey-haired and placid, bearing with him as with an
elderly and rather troublesome child; sylvia futvoye, their daughter, is
a pretty and attractive girl of about twenty. mrs. rapkin knocks at the
bedroom door._] mr. ventimore! a gentleman and two ladies to see you. [_she
opens the door--then, to the professor._] no, sir, he hasn't come in
yet--but he won't be long now.

professor futvoye.

[_by the table._] are you _sure_ of that, ma'am?

mrs. rapkin.

well, sir, he said as how he'd be in early, to make sure as everythink was
as it _should_ be. [_in a burst of confidence._] if you _must_ know, he's
expecting company to dinner this evening.

[_sylvia has moved to the window;
mrs. futvoye stands by the table._

professor futvoye.

[_placing his hat and stick on a small shelf on the left of fireplace, and
standing by table._] i'm aware of that, ma'am. we happen to be the company
mr. ventimore is expecting. don't let us keep you from your cooking.

mrs. rapkin.

[_with another burst of confidence._] well, sir, to tell you the truth, i
'_ave_ a good deal on my 'ands just now.

[_she goes out by door at back._

sylvia.

[_after moving about and inspecting the pictures._] i rather like horace's
rooms.

professor futvoye.

[_irritably._] i wish he'd manage to be _in_ 'em! i fully expected he'd be
back by this time. _most_ annoying!

mrs. futvoye.

[_resignedly._] i _thought_ you were bringing us all this way for nothing!
and when you must be quite exhausted enough as it is, after lecturing all
the afternoon!

professor futvoye.

i'm not in the least exhausted, sophia; not in the least!

mrs. futvoye.

well, anthony, if _you're_ not, sylvia and i are! [_she sits in armchair by
the window._] but _why_ you couldn't wait till eight o'clock to know how
horace got on at that sale i _can't_ think!

professor futvoye.

he ought to have been back _long_ ago! i can see _no_ excuse for his
dawdling like this. none whatever!

[_he sits on right of table._

sylvia.

[_standing behind table._] perhaps he went back to his office?

professor futvoye.

[_tartly._] he's much more likely to have dropped into his club for a
rubber of bridge!

sylvia.

don't you think you're rather ungrateful to grumble at poor horace like
this, after he's given up a whole day's work to oblige you?

professor futvoye.

i was not aware, my dear, that he has, or ever had, a day's work to give
up! correct me if i am wrong--but i am under the impression that nobody has
employed him as an architect _yet_.

sylvia.

that isn't horace's fault!

professor futvoye.

possibly--but it doesn't make him more desirable as a future son-in-law.

sylvia.

horace is sure to succeed as soon as he gets a chance. [_sitting on table
and leaning over the professor._] if you would only say a word for him to
godfather, he might be able to help him.

professor futvoye.

wackerbath? no, my dear, i couldn't bring myself to take such an advantage
of our old friendship as _that_! i've no belief in ventimore's succeeding
in life. he _may_ have ability--though i'm bound to say i see little
_evidence_ of it--but, depend upon it, he'll never make any money!

sylvia.

how _can_ you tell?

professor futvoye.

because he can't even take care of the little he has! look at the money
he's throwing away on this totally unnecessary dinner to-night!

sylvia.

oh! when it's just a quiet little dinner in his own rooms! if it had been
the _carlton_, now!

professor futvoye.

he proposed to entertain us at the carlton at first--but i stopped _that_.
it all bears out what i say--that he has absolutely _no_ sense of the value
of

mrs. futvoye.

[_interposing calmly._] there, anthony, that's enough! horace is engaged to
sylvia--and the most sensible thing we can do is to make the best of it.

professor futvoye.

[_rising and moving to the right._] i _am_ making the best of it, sophia!
if ventimore was like spencer pringle, now!

sylvia.

he would never have been engaged to _me_!

professor futvoye.

[_to sylvia._] pringle, my dear, is a steady, hard-working young fellow.
i've a real respect and liking for _pringle_. and if i _must_ have an
architect for a son-in-law, he is the man _i_ should have preferred!

sylvia.

why, he hasn't been near us for weeks and weeks--and i hope he means to
stay away altogether! i always thought him a conceited prig.

[_moving towards door at back._

professor futvoye.

you may come to think differently, my dear. [_pulling out his watch._]
nearly half-past six! tut-tut! all this time wasted! it's useless to wait
any longer for ventimore. we may just as well go!

[_he goes to get his hat and
stick._

mrs. futvoye.

[_rising._] i knew how it would _be_!

sylvia.

[_at door._] wait! [_opens door and listens._] there's horace coming
upstairs! i'm sure it's his step!

professor futvoye.

[_stops by table with relief._] at last! now i shall know!

[_spencer pringle enters. he is a
smug, self-satisfied looking man of
about thirty-five, smooth-shaven,
except for small side-whiskers. he
is in a light tweed suit, having
just come up from the country._

sylvia.

[_repressing her disappointment._] mr. pringle!

pringle.

[_in doorway._] miss sylvia! mrs. futvoye! [_shaking hands with the
professor._] professor! well! this is unexpected.

[_sylvia comes down to right._

professor futvoye.

[_graciously._] glad to see you, pringle! you are quite a stranger. indeed,
my daughter was remarking, only a little while ago, that you hadn't been
near us for weeks!

sylvia.

[_in an indignant undertone._] _father!_

[_mrs. futvoye sits down again._

pringle.

[_to sylvia, flattered._] delighted to think i've been missed! but my
apparent--er--neglect has been quite unavoidable.

sylvia.

[_laughing._] so kind of you to relieve our minds, mr. pringle!

pringle.

[_solemnly._] i assure you it's the fact. i've been away constantly for the
last two months, superintending work i'm doing in various parts of the
country. [_with importance._] hardly a moment to call my own!

[_sylvia turns with the intention
of sitting down; he places a chair
for her._

professor futvoye.

[_taking chair behind table._] a busy man like _you_, my dear pringle, has
no need to make excuses.

pringle.

[_fetching a chair for himself._] i really have been fearfully overworked.
not that i complain of _that_! [_as he sits down between the professor
and sylvia._] i'd no idea we should meet _here_, though. is ventimore a
friend of yours?

professor futvoye.

oh, we know him, yes. as _you_ do, it seems.

pringle.

i sublet a room in my offices to him. rather a good arrangement for him,
because he gets experience by looking after any little matters that i've no
time to attend to.

sylvia.

[_with suppressed resentment._] and isn't that rather a good arrangement
for _you_?

pringle.

it works fairly well--as a rule. but when i returned from the country this
afternoon i found he hadn't been near the office all day!

[_he rises, takes sylvia's
parasol officiously, and places it
in a corner, then returns._

professor futvoye.

[_to his wife, but speaking at sylvia._] not been near the office all day!
i _thought_ as much!

sylvia.

the reason _why_ he wasn't able to help you, mr. pringle, is because he's
been at an auction, bidding for things on father's account.

professor futvoye.

i should have attended the sale myself but for an engagement to lecture at
the hieroglyphical on a recently inscribed cylinder.

mrs. futvoye.

and--you'll hardly believe it, mr. pringle,--but, the moment the lecture
was over, he hurried us off here to find out what mr. ventimore had got
for him! it's really too ridiculous! as if his study wasn't littered up
quite enough already!

professor futvoye.

women, my dear pringle, can't understand the feelings of a collector. it's
not _every_ day, i can tell you, that a collection of such importance comes
into the market.

pringle.

i didn't know ventimore was an expert in such things. i thought you could
get brokers to bid for you.

professor futvoye.

of course--of course. but i don't trust brokers--they know too much! and,
as i gave ventimore my own catalogue, with a tick against the lots i want
and the limit i'm prepared to go, noted on the margin, he _can't_ make any
mistake.

pringle.

i suppose not. that is, if he's _accustomed_ to auctions.

professor futvoye.

what do you mean?

pringle.

only that if you _aren't_, there's always a liability to lose your head in
the excitement, and go beyond the margin. but i daresay ventimore wouldn't
do _that_.

professor futvoye.

if he _has_! [_he rises excitedly._] and he might--he _might_! with his
recklessness about money, it's the very thing he _would_ do! letting me in
for prices i can't afford! [_passionately._] no wonder he is in no hurry to
show himself--no wonder!

mrs. futvoye.

[_rising and attempting to pacify him._] now, anthony, there's nothing to
work yourself up into a state for, at present. do for goodness' sake wait
till you hear all about it!

professor futvoye.

[_resentfully._] it seems i shall _have_ to wait, sophia--but i'm tired of
waiting _here_. [_he goes to get his hat and stick._] and evidently he
doesn't intend to

[_turns, as the door opens and
horace ventimore comes in briskly.
horace is a pleasant-looking young
man, with a cheery and rather boyish
manner; he comes down and greets the
futvoyes without seeing pringle for
the moment; sylvia has risen,
delighted at his arrival._

horace.

i _say_! this is jolly! [_shaking hands._] wish i'd known you were coming
on here after the lecture. [_pringle rises, and waits stiffly for
recognition._] warm work, wasn't it, professor, lecturing on an afternoon
like this? do sit down. [_looks at table._] haven't they given you any
tea?

professor futvoye.

[_irritably._] no, no, no. we want no tea. it's too late for tea. we merely
looked in on our way home to

horace.

[_sees pringle._] and pringle, too! [_pats him on shoulder._] how are you,
old fellow? you been at the lecture, too?

pringle.

[_with implied rebuke._] no, i've only just come round--as you weren't at
the office,--to

horace.

i've been engaged all day. oh, by the bye, do you know professor and
mrs.

[_is about to introduce him._

pringle.

[_stiffly._] i am happy to say, my dear fellow, that i require no
introduction. we are old friends.

professor futvoye.

[_impatiently._] to come to the point, ventimore, as we are rather pressed
for time--about the sale? how did you get on, eh?

horace.

oh, ah--the sale. [_producing catalogue from pocket._] well, i did exactly
as you told me.

professor futvoye.

[_snatching catalogue from him._] yes, yes. let's go through it lot by
lot. lot 23, now. did you get that?

horace.

no. another fellow got _that_.

professor futvoye.

[_annoyed._] tssch! well,--so long as you secured lot 35. [_reading from
catalogue._] "copper bowl, engraved round rim with verse from hafiz," you
know. come, you didn't miss _that_?

[_sylvia is listening anxiously._

horace.

i did, though. it was snapped up by a sportsman in the very worst hat i
ever saw in my life. he got it for sixteen guineas.

professor futvoye.

[_disgusted._] what? a rare example of early persian work like that going
for only sixteen guineas! i'd willingly have paid double the money!

horace.

but your limit was seven pound ten, sir! and you warned me not to exceed
it.

professor futvoye.

you should have used your own judgment, sir! well, well,--which of the lots
i marked _did_ you get?

horace.

[_going to sylvia, who is sympathetically distressed._] couldn't get one
of 'em. they all fetched record prices.

_professor futvoye._

[_violently._] upon my soul!... pringle, you were right! i ought to have
employed a broker! [_to horace._] so you've come back with absolutely
_nothing_?

horace.

well, no. i did manage to get _one_ thing.

sylvia.

i _knew_ you would!

professor futvoye.

[_to horace._] you did? but i understood you to say just now!

horace.

this was a little flutter on my own account. i thought i'd stick the sale
out, do you see; and near the end there was an extra lot put up--it wasn't
in the catalogue. [_the professor makes an exclamation of angry
disgust._] well, it was being passed round for us to look at--and nobody
seemed to think much of it. but it struck me, somehow, it might be a dark
horse, so i made a bid--and got it for only a sovereign!

professor futvoye.

pah!

sylvia.

but you haven't told us yet what it _is_.

horace.

haven't i? oh, well, it's a sort of metal jar. brass, the auctioneer said
it was.

professor futvoye.

tchah! some modern bazaar trash!

horace.

it doesn't _look_ modern. i left it downstairs to be cleaned. [_going to
door right of fireplace._] i'll go and bring it up.

[_he goes out._

professor futvoye.

[_furious._] i've no patience with the fellow! squandering his sovereigns
like this on worthless rubbish!

mrs. futvoye.

don't be so fractious, anthony! for all you can tell, he may have picked up
a treasure.

professor futvoye.

[_grimly._] he _may_, sophia. on the other hand, he may _not_. which, on
the whole, is rather more probable.

[_he retires up to the fireplace
as horace returns, carrying a
large metal bottle with a long neck
and bulbous body, encrusted with a
thick greenish-white deposit.
pringle closes the door for him
after he has entered._

horace.

[_bringing the bottle down to right of table._] here it is! [_the
others--except the professor, who remains aloof--gather round and examine
it in dubious silence._] it's not much to _look_ at.

pringle.

very dusty! [_wipes his hand after touching the bottle._] and you gave a
_sovereign_ for this, ventimore, eh? h'm! dear me!

sylvia.

it may look better when it's had a good scrubbing.

mrs. futvoye.

scrubbing, my dear! it will have to be _scraped_ first!

horace.

yes--looks as if it had been dragged up from the bottom of the sea, doesn't
it? i've an idea it may be worth something. i should like to have _your_
opinion, professor.

[_he smiles uneasily._

professor futvoye.

[_after a glance at it._] my opinion is that you might just as well have
flung your sovereign into the gutter!

horace.

i admit it was speculative--but it _may_ turn out a winner. it's rather odd
it should be so tightly sealed up.

professor futvoye.

[_with more interest._] sealed up, is it? [_coming down and looking at it
more carefully._] h'm--the _form_ is certainly antique. it's wonderful what
they can do in birmingham!

horace.

i really think it may have something inside it. it's not so very heavy, and
yet--[_tapping it_]--it doesn't sound quite as if it were empty.

professor futvoye.

it _might_ contain something. i think it most unlikely--but still, it
_might_.

sylvia.

[_laughing._] you don't mean it might be like that jar the fisherman found
in "the arabian nights," with a genius inside it?

professor futvoye.

i did _not_ mean anything so frivolous, my dear. and, if you _must_ quote
"the arabian nights," it's as well to remember in future that the more
correct term is not "genius," but "jinnee." singular, jinnee--plural, jinn.

sylvia.

i'll remember, dear. singular, jinn--plural, jinnies.

professor futvoye.

[_instructively._] a name applied by arab mythology to a race of aerial
beings, created of the flame of fire, but capable of assuming human form
and exercising supernatural powers.

sylvia.

oh, do let's open it now and see what _is_ inside!

professor futvoye.

don't be childish, sylvia, don't be childish! we've no time now for idle
curiosity. if we're to dress and be back here by eight o'clock, we ought to
start at once. [_mrs. futvoye prepares to go and moves towards door._]
good-bye, then, ventimore, for the present. [_he gets his hat and stick._]
it is not to be an _elaborate_ entertainment, i trust? a simple ordinary
little dinner is all _i_ require.

horace.

[_as he opens the door for mrs. futvoye._] i've tried to remember your
tastes, professor.

professor futvoye.

i hope you have succeeded. good-bye, pringle. very glad to have run across
you again. let us see more of you in future.

pringle.

[_going to the door with him._] you shall, professor, you shall.
[_following professor and mrs. futvoye out to landing._] by the way,
are you likely to be in next?

[_horace closes door, leaving
sylvia still looking at the
bottle._

sylvia.

[_turning as he comes down to her._] i'm certain there must be _something_
inside that jar. and if it's anything really interesting, father will be so
frightfully pleased that he won't be disagreeable all the evening!

horace.

[_ruefully._] ah, i'm afraid that's too much to look forward to.

sylvia.

[_touching his arm with a little gesture of sympathy._] you poor dear!
you're not beginning to be nervous about your dinner, are you?

horace.

n--no. not _nervous_ exactly. something _might_ go wrong. still, i hope
there won't be _much_ your father can find fault with.

sylvia.

i'm sure there won't! and if he does, why, _we_ won't mind, will we? we
shall be together, you know!

horace.

[_putting his arm round her._] that's what i've been thinking of all day!

[_he kisses her as pringle
returns, unseen by them. his jaw
drops as he sees them together._

pringle.

[_coming forward._] er[_horace and sylvia separate._] miss
sylvia--the professor asked me to tell you

sylvia.

i was just coming. [_taking her parasol and moving to door, which pringle
has left open._] good-bye, mr. pringle. [_stopping horace and pringle
as they are about to see her down the stairs._] no, you mustn't come down,
either of you. [_to horace, with an affectation of distance._]
good-bye--mr. ventimore.

[_she goes out._

pringle.

[_by the table._] i should like to ask you, ventimore, have you known miss
futvoye _long_?

horace.

[_still at door, looking after sylvia._] a little over six weeks.

pringle.

and i have known her for as many years!

horace.

[_closing door, and coming towards him._] have you, though? i noticed the
professor was uncommonly cordial to you. look here, are you doing anything
this evening?

pringle.

er--no. that is, nothing particular. why?

horace.

because it would be friendly of you if you'd come and dine here. _they're_
coming, you know.

pringle.

i know. [_after a moment's hesitation._] thanks, i don't mind if i do.

horace.

capital! i'm sure if any one can keep the old man in a good humour, _you_
can.

pringle.

[_sourly._] i see. you want me to engage him in conversation and leave you
free to carry on your flirtation with miss futvoye unobserved?

horace.

not quite that. there's nothing _underhand_ about it. we're engaged, you
know.

pringle.

engaged! [_after a pause._] and how long have you been that?

horace.

only since the day before yesterday.

pringle.

[_blankly._] oh! [_he walks down to window._] i congratulate you;
er--heartily, of course. [_looking out of window._] and--and when do you
think of being married?

horace.

it's no use thinking of that, at present. not till the professor takes a
rosier view of my prospects, at all events. but if, like a good fellow, you
could put in a word for me, it would give me no end of a leg up!

pringle.

[_dully, with his face still averted._] you don't seem to realise what
you're asking!

horace.

[_suddenly understanding, with compunction._] my _dear_ chap! [_he puts
both his hands on pringle's shoulders._] what a selfish brute i've been
not to see! i _am_ sorry!

pringle.

[_stiffly._] as a matter of fact, i'd quite made up my mind to propose to
her--as soon as i'd got those country jobs off my mind. and now i find
_you_'ve cut in before me!

horace.

well, it's straight of you to tell me. i suppose you'd rather come and dine
some _other_ evening? if so

pringle.

no. a promise is a promise. i'll come. mind you, i don't pretend it won't
be an effort--but i'll see what i can do for you.

horace.

[_gratefully._] you _are_ a good chap, pringle!--one of the best! though,
really, after what you've told me, i hardly like

pringle.

not another word. anything i _can_ say on your behalf--without _too_ wide
a departure from strict accuracy--i'll say with pleasure. [_going up to
door._] eight o'clock's the hour, isn't it? all right. [_he goes out._]

[_horace makes a movement towards
the fireplace, as if to ring the
bell. then his eye is caught by the
brass bottle, which is standing in
the centre of the room. he stops,
looks at his watch, and decides that
he has time to open the bottle. he
examines the cap on its neck, then
goes to sideboard and takes from it
a heavy paper-weight and a
champagne-opener, returns to chair
on right of table and sits, holding
the bottle between his knees. using
the champagne-opener as a chisel,
and the paper-weight as hammer, he
proceeds to chip away the deposit
round the cap, whistling an air from
a musical comedy as he works._

horace.

[_to himself._] i've _loosened_ it. [_he seizes the cap and tries to screw
it off._] it's _giving_!

[_suddenly the room is in complete
darkness; there is a loud report
and a spurt of flame from the
bottle. horace has fallen back on
the floor, with the cap of the
bottle in his hand. there is just
light enough to see a tall weird
figure standing with out-stretched
arms behind the bottle._

horace.

[_sitting up and rubbing the back of his head; faintly._] hullo! is any
one there? who's that come in?

the stranger.

[_in an attitude of supplication._] towbah! yah nebbi ullah! anna lah amill
kathahlik ibadan! wullah-hi!

horace.

i daresay you're perfectly right, sir--but i've no idea what you're talking
about.

the stranger.

[_repeating the arabic sentence._] towbah! (&c. &c.) wullah-hi!

horace.

[_about to raise himself, sees the figure for the first time, and falls
back astonished; then, recovering himself._] i suppose you've just taken
the rooms on the ground-floor--so you _must_ be able to make yourself
understood in english?

the stranger.

[_the room has grown lighter, and he is seen to be in dull-green robes and
a high-peaked turban. his long grey beard is divided into three thin
strands; his eyes are slightly slanted, and his expression is a curious
mixture of fatuous benignity, simplicity, and cunning._] assuredly i can
speak so as to be understood of all men.

horace.

then it's as well to _do_ it. what was it you said just now?

the stranger.

i said: "repentance, o prophet of allah! i will not return to the like
conduct ever!"

horace.

oh, i beg your pardon. [_sitting up again._] thought you were speaking to
_me_. but i say--[_looking up at him_]--how do you come to be here?

the stranger.

surely by thine own action!

horace.

i see. you ran up to see what was the matter. fact is, my head's still
rather buzzy. i fancy i must have hit it somehow when i was trying to open
that jar.

the stranger.

then it _was_ thy hand and none other that removed the stopper?

horace.

i--i suppose so. all _i_ know is that _something_ went off with a bang. i
can't imagine what could have been _inside_ the beastly thing!

the stranger.

who else but i myself?

horace.

[_slowly rising to his feet._] you must have your little joke, eh? [_he
reels against the table._] or did i misunderstand you? my head's in such a
muddle!

the stranger.

i tell thee that i have been confined within that accursed vessel for
centuries beyond all calculation.

horace.

you can't pull my leg like that, you know! seriously, just tell me who you
_are_.

the stranger.

know then that he who now addresseth thee is none other than
fakrash-el-aamash, a jinnee of the green jinn.

horace.

[_half to himself._] singular, "jinnee"--plural, "jinn." where did i hear
that? i--i shall remember presently.

fakrash.

i dwelt in the palace of the mountain of the clouds in the garden of irem,
above the city of babel.

horace.

[_to himself._] why, of _course_! sylvia! the arabian nights! [_to
fakrash._] i can quite account for you _now_--but go on.

fakrash.

for a certain offence that i committed, the wrath of suleymán, the son of
dáood--on whom be peace!--[_he salaams_]--was heavy against me, and he
commanded that i should be enclosed within a bottle of brass, and thrown
into the sea of el-karkar, there to abide the day of doom.

horace.

don't think i'm _believing_ in you. [_walking round the front of the
bottle, as if to test fakrash by touching him._] i've sense enough to
know you're not _real_!

[_he withdraws his hand without
venturing upon the experiment._

fakrash.

stroke thy head and recover thy faculties! i am real, even as thou art.

[_he touches horace's shoulder;
horace recoils._

horace.

i shall come round in time! [_by the table, to fakrash._] you tell me
you've just come out of this bottle?

fakrash.

dost thou doubt that it is even as i have said?

horace.

well, i should have thought myself you'd take a bigger size in bottles. but
of course, i couldn't doubt you if i saw you get _into_ it again.

fakrash.

that would be the easiest of actions! [_he makes a sudden swooping
movement, as though to re-enter the bottle, and then thinks better of it._]
but i should indeed be a silly-bearded one to do this thing, since thou
mightst be tempted to seal me up once more!

horace.

[_disappointed, and backing against table, half afraid._] too knowing an
old bird to be caught like that, aren't you? but _i_ don't mind! you'll
disappear presently.

fakrash.

true, o young man of perfect qualities and good works! but i will not leave
thee before i have rewarded thy kindness. for in the sky it is written upon
the pages of the air: "he who doeth kind actions shall experience the
like!" therefore--[_with a lordly gesture_]--demand of me what thou wilt,
and thou shalt receive!

horace.

oh, i shall be awake so soon it's not worth while troubling you.

fakrash.

dismiss bashfulness from thee. [_advancing towards him._] for by thy hand
hath my deliverance been accomplished, and if i were to serve thee for a
thousand years, regarding nothing else, even thus could i not requite thee!

horace.

[_retreating in some alarm to window._] look here. i don't want _anything_,
and--and the best thing _you_ can do is to vanish.

fakrash.

[_at back of table._] not till thou hast told me thy name and the trade
that thou followest.

horace.

oh, you'll go _then_? [_fakrash assents._] well, i'll humour you. my name
is horace ventimore, and i'm an architect. i get my living by building
houses, you know. or rather, i _should_, if i could only get hold of a
client--which i can't.

fakrash.

[_coming down nearer bottle._] grant thy servant a period of delay, and it
may be that i can procure thee a client.

horace.

good old arabian nights again! you'd better not make the delay long--my
head will be clear very soon.

fakrash.

greater rewards by far will i bestow upon thee, most meritorious of men!
but now--[_going up to right_]--i must leave thee for a season.

horace.

i _knew_ i was coming round--you'll be gone directly.

fakrash.

aye, for i must seek out suleymán--[_salaaming_]--on whom be peace!--and
obtain pardon from him.

[_he waves his arm, and the door at
back flies open._

horace.

[_eagerly._] yes--i _would_! you go and do _that_! make haste! [_the door
closes, leaving fakrash visible through it in an unearthly light._]
good-bye--and good luck!

fakrash.

[_through door._] to thee also! and be assured that i will not be unmindful
of thy welfare!

[_the door becomes solid as
fakrash vanishes._

horace.

[_rubbing his eyes._] what a queer dream! [_he goes up to the door, opens
it, then returns and sits by table._] so vivid! [_he sees the brass bottle
on the floor._] open! [_looking inside it._] empty! h'm, better get it out
of the way.

[_he takes the bottle in one hand
and the cap in the other, and
carries them into the bedroom on
right. the moment he has gone there
is a rush of wind, and then a heavy
thud on the balcony outside, and mr.
wackerbath, a stout, prosperous-looking,
elderly gentleman, in tall hat, frock-coat,
white waistcoat, &c., reels through
the open window into the room, and
sinks into the armchair on left of
tablet where he sits puffing and
blowing._

mr. wackerbath.

[_feebly._] where _am_ i? how did i? [_he takes off his hat._] ah, of
course! i remember now. [_he rises as horace enters from bedroom._]
mr.--ah--ventimore, i think? mr. horace ventimore?

horace.

[_slightly surprised._] yes, that's my name. [_offering chair on right of
table._] won't you sit down?

mr. wackerbath.

thank you--i will. [_he sits down._] i--i ought to apologise for dropping
in on you in this--ah--unceremonious way--but i acted, i may say--ah--on a
sudden impulse.

horace.

i'm afraid i haven't much time to spare--but if it's anything of
importance

mr. wackerbath.

[_panting._] you must give me a little time--till i--ah--get my wind again.

horace.

certainly. i know the stairs here _are_ rather steep.

mr. wackerbath.

are they? i don't remember noticing them. however! my name, mr. ventimore,
is wackerbath--samuel wackerbath, of wackerbath and greatrex, a firm of
auctioneers and estate agents whose name may--ah--possibly be not
unfamiliar to you.

horace.

[_who has obviously never heard it before._] oh, of course--of course.

mr. wackerbath.

i may tell you that for the last few years i have rented an old
place--moatham abbey they call it--in surrey, which is not quite as
up-to-date as i could wish in the matter of modern conveniences.

horace.

that's not unusual with ancient abbeys, is it?

mr. wackerbath.

[_solemnly._] precisely. well, to come to the point, i've lately acquired
some land in the neighbourhood of surrey and hampshire, with a view to
building a country residence. [_horace becomes more interested, and seats
himself at table on mr. wackerbath's right._] you see, there's an
excellent site--on a hill with a south aspect, just above the village of
lipsfield, and overlooking the valley and river

horace.

[_making a note._] well, mr. wackerbath?

mr. wackerbath.

well, as i was saying only a minute or two ago to a friend as we were
crossing westminster bridge on our way to waterloo[_he pauses, with an
endeavour to recollect._] where _was_ i?

horace.

waterloo.

mr. wackerbath.

ah, yes. i remarked to him: "all i require is a thoroughly capable
architect." [_horace grows alert and excited._] and instantly _your_ name
flashed across my mind. so i--ah--hurried off at once, and--here i _am_!

horace.

[_with a sudden misgiving._] may i ask--you--you weren't _recommended_ to
me by--by--[_he looks round at the door through which fakrash has
vanished_]--any one?

mr. wackerbath.

[_with dignity._] certainly not! it was--ah--entirely my own idea. but why
do you ask? [_huffily._] is an introduction necessary?

horace.

[_relieved._] no, no--not in the least! i--i merely asked. i shall be very
pleased to undertake the commission. could you give me some idea of the
amount you thought of spending on the house?

mr. wackerbath.

well, i don't think i could go to more than--say, _sixty_ thousand pounds.

horace.

[_half rising in his surprise._] sixty thousand! [_he recollects himself
and sits down in assumed calm._] oh, not more than _that_? i _see_.

mr. wackerbath.

for the house itself. but there'll be the out-buildings--and the
decorations. altogether, i sha'n't complain so long as the total doesn't
exceed a hundred thousand. i take it that, for that sum, mr. ventimore, you
could give me a country-house that i shall have no cause--ah--to feel
ashamed of.

horace.

i can safely promise _that_. and now--when could i run down and have a look
at the site, and go into the matter thoroughly?

mr. wackerbath.

we must fix a day later. i'm rather in a hurry now; and besides, i must
consult the wife. perhaps you could give me an appointment here?

horace.

these are only my private rooms. i shall be at my office in great college
street to-morrow, if you could look in then. [_giving him card._] here's
the address.

mr. wackerbath.

good! [_he rises and moves towards window, while horace rings bell by
fireplace._] i'll look in on my way from waterloo to the city. [_he
perceives that he is walking out on to a balcony, and turns._] how the
devil did i come in? i'll be with you at eleven sharp.

[_he goes towards the bedroom door
on the right._

horace.

[_at door to landing._] _this_ way, mr. wackerbath.

mr. wackerbath.

[_vaguely._] i thought i came _that_ way. [_as he goes up._] i can see
already that you're the very man for me. [_at door to landing._] now i must
be off, or i shall miss my train to lipsfield. [_as horace offers to see
him downstairs._] don't trouble--i can find my way down. eleven sharp
to-morrow. _good_ evening.

[_as he passes out horace touches
his back, as though half suspecting
him to be another illusion. mr.
wackerbath turns and shakes hands
effusively, then goes out, and
horace closes door._

horace.

[_to himself._] _he's_ no dream, anyhow! [_with exultation._] a client! a
real client of my own! at last!

mrs. rapkin.

[_enters from landing._] did you ring for me, sir?--or was it only to let
the gentleman out?

[_she comes down._

horace.

oh, there _is_ something i had to tell you. we shall be _five_ at dinner,
not four. you can manage all right, eh?

mrs. rapkin.

[_comfortably._] lor, yes, sir. _that_ won't make no difference!

horace.

[_in front of table._] by the way, mrs. rapkin, you haven't let your
ground-floor yet, have you? to--to an asiatic gentleman?

mrs. rapkin.

_me_, sir? let to a asiatic! no,--nor wouldn't! why, there was rapkin's own
sister-in-law let her droring-room floor to one. and--[_darkly_]--reason
she 'ad to repent of it--for all his gold spectacles.

horace.

[_relieved._] ah, i _thought_ you hadn't. [_sits on table._] well, about
the waiting to-night? i suppose i can depend on rapkin for that, eh? where
_is_ he?

mrs. rapkin.

well, sir, not to deceive you, he ain't back yet from his public--libery as
_he_ calls it.

horace.

oh, _that's_ what he calls it, eh?

mrs. rapkin.

whatever he's took, sir, you may rely on him to 'and the dishes without
'aving no accidents.

[_a noise is heard from the street
below, which gradually resolves
itself into an oriental chant._

horace.

what's going on outside? [_he goes to window, looks out, and then starts
back uneasily._] i say. it's--it's devilish odd--but there seems to me to
be a whole caravan of camels down there!

mrs. rapkin.

[_crossing to window._] camuels, sir?

horace.

well, you look and see what _you_ make of them!

mrs. rapkin.

[_looking down over balcony._] lor! they _do_ look like camuels, sir--or
_somethink_ o' that. i expect they belong to the 'ippodrome, or else a
circus.

horace.

[_relieved._] i say, what a sensible woman you are! of course! i never
thought of _that_!

mrs. rapkin.

[_still looking out, while the chant finishes with a few shouts, as though
a halt were called._] they seem to be stopping outside the 'ouse. them
camuels have folded up, and all the niggers as is with them is a kneelin'
down with their noses on the kerbstone!

horace.

[_uncomfortably._] they're only _resting_. come away and don't take any
notice. they'll move on presently.

mrs. rapkin.

[_still at window._] but they're _unpackin'_ the camuels now! and--well, if
they ain't bringing everythink in _'ere_!

[_she retreats to behind the
table._

horace.

great scott!

[_he comes down to left of stage._

mrs. rapkin.

they wouldn't be _more_ things as you've been buying at that auction, sir,
would they?

[_the chant is heard now inside the
house._

horace.

no, no. it's a mistake! it _must_ be a mistake!

mrs. rapkin.

then i'd better go and tell them

[_she moves towards door to
landing, but before she reaches it,
it flies open mysteriously. a
moment afterwards a tall, fierce
oriental in turban and robes
appears in doorway and salaams.
mrs. rapkin recoils with a cry.
then a train of black slaves
enter, carrying large sacks, bales,
and chests, which they deposit on
the table and floor, till the room
is completely blocked; their chief
stands down on right, with his back
to the audience, and directs them
by gestures._

horace.

look here! i say,--you fellows! you've come to the wrong house!

[_the slaves pay no attention to
him._

mrs. rapkin.

'ere! my good _men_, what are you comin' in '_ere_ for, bringing all your
dust into my apartments?

horace.

[_standing paralysed; to himself._] we can't _both_ be dreaming!

mrs. rapkin.

[_trying to remonstrate with slaves._] this rubbish don't belong _'ere_! i
can't 'ave the 'ole place littered up with it! you needn't act so
ridic'lous if you _are_ niggers! [_to horace._] it ain't no use _my_
talking to 'em, sir. they're not like _christians_--they're deaf and dumb,
seemingly! _you_ try!

horace.

[_going to the head slave, who salaams as he approaches._] can you
understand if i ask a question? [_the head slave salaams again._] well,
i--i know it seems a silly thing to ask--but--but you don't happen to be
sent here by--by anybody with a name something like fakrash? [_the head
slave implies by a gesture that this is so._] you _have_!... well, look
here. _i_ don't want 'em. i decline to take 'em in. you have all these
things put on the camels again, and clear out! do you see what i mean? [_by
this time the other slaves have gone; the head slave signifies in
pantomime that the things are horace's, salaams, and goes out, the door
closing behind him mysteriously._] i don't believe that idiot understands
_now_! they've gone off to fetch _more_!

mrs. rapkin.

[_who has returned to window._] they've gone off altogether, sir. i can't
see nothink now but a cloud of dust.

horace.

[_sinks into chair on right of table with his head buried in his hands._]
the fools! the confounded fools!

mrs. rapkin.

[_comes to table and looks for horace in vain._] sir! sir! [_sees him
over the bales, &c._] sir! where _are_ you going to 'ave your dinner-party
_now_?

horace.

[_forlornly._] oh, i don't know--i don't know! don't worry me now, mrs.
rapkin! go away! can't you see i want to think--i want to _think_!

mrs. rapkin.

[_as she goes towards door at back._] well, i _must_ say and i _do_ say
that if this _'ad_ to 'appen, it couldn't have come more ill-convenient!
[_she goes out._

[_as soon as she has gone horace
rises and comes to an
antique-looking trunk on left; he
opens it, and brings out an
enormous emerald and ruby, each the
size of a cocoa-nut; he looks at
them for a moment in dismay, and
drops them back with a groan. then
he crosses to a sack on the right,
opens it, and brings out an immense
diamond. while he is doing all
this, fakrash has risen from
among the bales behind the table,
and watches him with benign
complacency._

horace.

[_as he returns the diamond to the sack._] oh! damn it all!

fakrash.

my son!

horace.

[_recoiling on sacks._] i'm not dreaming _now_! i'm awake! and yet--all
that story of yours about your being shut up in a brass bottle? i _did_
dream _that_--eh?

fakrash.

nay, it is even as i told thee.

horace.

and it _was_ you who sent me all these things?

fakrash.

a few trifling gifts by no means suited to thy dignity! thou owest me no
thanks.

horace.

i--i'd rather not owe you _anything_. i mean--i can't possibly accept any
presents from you.

fakrash.

nay, they are freely thine.

horace.

i don't want to be ungracious, but i must decline to be under any
obligation whatever to a--well, to a perfect stranger like yourself.

fakrash.

hast thou not placed me under the heaviest of obligations by delivering me
from a bottle of brass? to escape out of a bottle is pleasant!

horace.

so i should imagine. but, you see, i'd no notion what i was _doing_
or--well, it's done _now_, and if you really wish to show your gratitude
for a very trifling service, i'll tell you how you can do it. [_in a tone
of earnest entreaty._] take back all these gifts of yours, and let me
alone!

fakrash.

[_beaming._] truly i am amazed by thy modesty and magnanimity!

horace.

i'm _not_ magnanimous--i'm devilish annoyed! [_exasperated._] hang it all!
_can't_ you understand that all these things are no earthly use to _me_?
you might just as well have sent me so many white elephants!

fakrash.

as thou pleasest! to send thee elephants--yea, even in abundance--will be
no difficult undertaking.

[_he makes a movement as though
about to summon them._

horace.

[_aghast._] good lord! don't you go wasting white elephants on _me_! you
take everything so literally! all _i_ meant was that if these things _were_
white elephants, instead of what they are, i couldn't be more embarrassed!
_now_ do you see?

fakrash.

[_coming down to right._] thou seemest to me to be despising riches beyond
all price.

horace.

exactly! because they _are_ beyond all price! _look_ at those
sacks--bulging, simply _bulging_ with diamonds and rubies and emeralds as
big as ostrich eggs! well, i can't _wear_ 'em. they'd be too dressy! i
can't _sell_ 'em--no one could afford to buy a single one of 'em! and how
am i to account for having them at all?

fakrash.

thou canst surely say that they are presents to thee from
fakrash-el-aamash, a jinnee of the green jinn, in return for thy kindness
in releasing him from a bottle of brass.

horace.

oh, _can_ i? i fancy i see myself giving that explanation! [_more mildly._]
no, fakrash,--you meant well--but the kindest thing _you_ can do is to
remove all this at once

fakrash.

this is a thing that cannot be. for to bestow gifts and receive them back
disgraceth the giver.

horace.

not when the gifts are only in the way. [_he nearly trips over a sack._]
just _look_ at this room!

fakrash.

verily it is but a miserable apartment for a person of thy distinction!

horace.

it's quite good enough for me when it isn't lumbered up like this. i'm
expecting friends to dinner this evening, and how the deuce am i to
entertain them comfortably unless you make it possible for me?

fakrash.

[_benevolently._] have no uneasiness. i will see that thou art enabled to
entertain thy guests as is fitting.

horace.

good! [_at window._] then you'll send for that caravan of yours?

fakrash.

i hear and obey.

[_he goes towards door at back and
waves his hand. the door flies
open. the chant is heard as before.
a pause, after which the head
slave enters and salaams. then
the train of black slaves pour in
noiselessly, and proceed to carry
out the chests, &c., and throw the
bales out over the balcony._

horace.

[_encouraging them._] that's right! _all_ those are to go. put your back
into it! [_to some slaves who are throwing down bales from the balcony._]
do be careful! you nearly bowled a camel over _that_ time! [_the last slave
has gone out with a sack from which an immense blue jewel has rolled;
horace picks it up and calls after him._] hi! you've dropped a little
sapphire thing! [_the head slave takes the sapphire from him and
salaams._] sure you've got the lot? all right! good day! [_the head slave
makes a final salaam and goes out, the door closing after him
mysteriously; horace approaches fakrash._] it's awfully nice of you not
to be _offended_, old fellow, and i'm just as much obliged as if i'd _kept_
the things, you know.

fakrash.

it is no matter. thou shalt receive other rewards more to thy liking.

horace.

[_alarmed._] no, no! i assure you i don't want _anything_. i can get along
quite well by myself. because--of course, _you_ wouldn't know it,
but--[_with pride_]--i've got a client now!

fakrash.

[_calmly._] i know it. was he not my first gift unto thee?

horace.

[_staggered._] your first? no, no--don't you go taking credit for
_that_! he assured me himself that he came of his own accord!

fakrash.

he knew no better. nevertheless it was i that procured him for thee.

horace.

how?

fakrash.

[_airily._] in the easiest manner possible. having remarked him upon a
bridge, i transported him instantly to thy dwelling, impressing him without
his knowledge with thy names and thy marvellous abilities.

horace.

[_horrified--to himself._] good lord! he _said_ he came in by the window!
[_to fakrash._] so you did _that_, did you? then you took a confounded
liberty! you'd no business to introduce clients to me in that irregular
way! don't you ever do this sort of thing again! just attend to your own
affairs in future. i _understood_ you were going off in search of suleymán.
it's high time you _started_. you won't find him in _this_ country, you
know.

fakrash.

he is on some journey--for in jerusalem itself could i find no sign of
him.

horace.

oh, come! you can't have flown as far as jerusalem and back _already_!

fakrash.

know'st thou not that, to a jinnee of the jinn, distance is but a trifling
matter?

horace.

so much the better! you'll be back in the east all the sooner. and when you
_are_ there, you _stay_ there. don't get disheartened if you don't find
suleymán directly. keep on pegging away till you _do_! why, the mere
travelling will be a pleasant change for you!

fakrash.

[_on right of table; sententiously._] well and wisely was it written: "in
travel there are five advantages. [_proceeding to enumerate them on his
fingers._] the first of these is"

horace.

[_impatiently, as he moves to his bedroom door on right._] i know, i know!
don't you bother to run through them _now_--i've got to dress for dinner.
just you bundle off to arabia and search for suleymán like billy-oh.
good-bye!

fakrash.

may allah never deprive thy friends of thy presence! never have i
encountered a mortal who has pleased me so greatly!

horace.

[_at bedroom door._] awfully good of you to say so!

fakrash.

farewell! prepare to receive a reward beyond all thine expectations!

[_he waves his arm, and for ten
seconds the room is in utter
darkness. there are sounds as of a
rushing wind and crashes and
rumblings. then the glimmer of
three arabian hanging lanterns is
seen faintly illuminating a large
central arch and two smaller side
ones. an immense perforated lantern
hanging from the domed roof then
becomes lit, and reveals an
octagonal hall with four curtained
arches, the fourth, down on the
right, being where horace's
bedroom door had been. the walls
are decorated in crimson, blue, and
gold arabesques. above the bedroom
door is a low divan with richly
embroidered cushions. opposite to
it, on the left, is a similar
divan. high in the wall overhead is
a window with gilded lattice-work,
through which is seen a soft blue
evening sky._

horace.

[_with his back to the audience._] great scott! what's that old idiot let
me in for _now_?

mrs. rapkin.

[_heard outside the arch up on right of central arch._] oh, whatever is it
_now_? what's 'appened? [_she enters._] goodness gracious! mr. ventimore,
sir--what's _come_ to the 'ouse?

horace.

then--_you_ see a difference, mrs. rapkin?

mrs. rapkin.

i don't see nothink as _ain't_ different. for mercy's sake, sir, _'oo's_
been alterin' of it like this?

horace.

well, _i_ haven't.

mrs. rapkin.

but where are you going to 'ave your dinner-party _now_, sir?

horace.

where? why, _here_! there's lots of _room_.

mrs. rapkin.

but i don't see no dinner-table, nor yet no sideboard.

horace.

never mind--never mind! don't _make_ difficulties, mrs. rapkin. you must
manage _somehow_.

mrs. rapkin.

i'll try, sir, but--not to deceive you--i feel that upset i 'ardly know
where i _am_.

horace.

you--you'll get used to it. [_persuasively._] and you're going to see me
through this, i'm sure. i must go and dress now. [_looking round the
hall._] i suppose you haven't any idea where my bedroom is?

mrs. rapkin.

i've no idea where _any_ of the rooms has got to, sir!

horace.

[_going to arch down on right._] i expect it's through here.

[_as he goes out, rapkin enters
from the arch on left of central
arch. he is respectably
dressed--type of elderly retired
butler; just now he is slightly and
solemnly fuddled._

mrs. rapkin.

william, this is a pretty state o' things!

rapkin.

what's marrer, m'rire? i'm all _ri'_. on'y bin a-improvin' o' my mind in
public libery.

mrs. rapkin.

public libery, indeed! you and your public libery.

rapkin.

it's pos'tive fac'. bin p'rusin' en-ensicklypejia britannia.

[_he stands blinking and slightly
swaying._

mrs. rapkin.

but do you mean to say you don't _see_ nothing?

rapkin.

[_muzzily._] not over distinct, m'rire. curus opt'cal d'lusion--due to
overshtudy--everything's spinnin' round. 'ave i stepped into alhambra, or
'ave i not? that's all _i_ want to know.

horace.

[_outside from right._] that you, rapkin? i want you.

mrs. rapkin.

[_to rapkin._] you ast _'im_ where you are--he's better able to tell you
than i am. i'm going back to my kitching.

[_she hesitates for a moment as to
which arch to go out by, and
finally goes out by the one on
right of central arch._

horace.

[_outside._] rapkin, i say! [_then entering from the lower arch on right as
soon as mrs. rapkin has gone; he is wearing a richly embroidered oriental
robe, &c., and a jewelled turban and plume, of which he is entirely
unconscious._] oh, _there_ you are! don't stand there gaping like a fish at
a flower-show! where the deuce are my evening clothes?

rapkin.

[_staring at him._] i don't know if it's _'nother_ opt'cal d'lusion--but
you appear t' me to ha' gorrem _on_.

horace.

eh, what? nonsense! [_suddenly discovering that he is in a robe and
turban._] hang it! i can't dine in these things! just see if you can't
find--no, there's no time. _you_ haven't changed yet! look sharp, the
people will be here in a minute or two--you _must_ be ready to open the
door to them.

rapkin.

[_looking round the hall._] i don't seem to see no doors--on'y arches. i
_can't_ open a arch--even if it would stay still.

horace.

pull yourself together, man! [_he twists rapkin sharply round._] come, a
little cold water on your head will soon bring you round.

rapkin.

i'm _comin_' round. don't see s'many arches already!

mrs. rapkin.

[_rushing in from arch on right of centre arch._] oh, william, william!
come away at once!

rapkin.

[_peacefully._] i'm aw'ri, m'rire!

mrs. rapkin.

[_seeing horace's costume._] oh, mr. ventimore, who's been and dressed
you up like that? why, it's 'ardly christian! [_to rapkin._] come away out
of this 'orrible 'ouse, do!

rapkin.

what's 'orrible about it?

mrs. rapkin.

everything! can't you see it's all turned into arabian 'alls?

rapkin.

_is_ it? [_he suddenly becomes indignant._] 'oo's bin and took sech a
liberty?

mrs. rapkin.

ah, you may well ask! oh, mr. ventimore. [_crossing to horace._] you've a
deal to answer for, _you_ 'ave!

rapkin.

what? _'im?_ _'e's_ done it all?

horace.

mrs. rapkin, don't _you_ lose your head! i depend on _you_, you know. get
your husband away and make him sober--or the dinner's _bound_ to come to
grief!

mrs. rapkin.

dinner indeed! and me unable to get into my own kitching for them nasty
niggers o' yours as is swarmin' there like beedles! the gell's bolted
already, and you and me'll go next, william, for stay under this roof with
sech i _won't_!

[_she drags rapkin by the arm to
arch up on right._

horace.

i say, mr. rapkin, don't you two desert me now! just _think_ of the hole
i'm in!

mrs. rapkin.

bein' a 'ole of your own makin', sir, you can get out of it yourself! come,
william!

rapkin.

i'm comin', m'rire! [_as he is dragged through arch by mrs. rapkin._]
you'll 'ear _more_ o' this, mr. ventimore!

horace.

[_alone on stage._] what's to be done now? can't dine _here_! [_the front
door bell rings with a long jangling tingle._] there they are! what am i to
_do_ with 'em? it'll _have_ to be the carlton, after all! [_he glances down
at his robes._] can't go like _this_, though! [_he tries to take off his
turban._] this damned thing won't come off! [_searching himself for
money._] and where are my pockets? [_with resigned despair._] well, i
suppose i must let them in, and--and tell 'em how it is!

[_as he turns to go up to the
centre arch, the hangings are drawn
back with a rattle, disclosing a
smaller hall behind. a row of
sinister-looking but richly robed
black slaves forms on each side of
the arch; a still more richly
dressed chief slave salaams to
horace, and with a magnificent
gesture ushers in the professor,
mrs. futvoye, and sylvia, to
each of whom the double row of
slaves salaam obsequiously, to
their intense amazement._

professor futvoye.

[_coming down to the right and looking round him._] why, why, why? what's
all this? where _are_ we?

mrs. futvoye.

[_following him closely._] we've evidently mistaken the house!

sylvia.

[_following her mother, and suddenly seeing horace._] but surely
that's--yes, it _is_ horace!

[_at a gesture from their chief,
the slaves retire, and he follows._

horace.

[_with some constraint, but trying to seem at his ease._] yes, it's _me_
all right. there's no mistake. most awfully glad to see you!

mrs. futvoye.

dear me! [_coming towards horace._] i really didn't recognise you for the
moment.

professor futvoye.

[_snappishly._] i don't know who _would_!

horace.

oh, ah--you mean in _these_ things. i--i must apologise for not dressing,
mrs. futvoye, but the fact is, i--i found myself like this, and i hadn't
time to put on anything else.

professor futvoye.

[_crossing to horace._] any apologies for the simplicity of your costume
are _quite_ unnecessary.

sylvia.

you really are magnificent, horace! _my_ poor frock is simply nowhere!

professor futvoye.

[_glaring round._] i observe that this is a very different room from the
one we were in this afternoon.

horace.

ah, i _thought_ you'd notice _that_! [_deciding on perfect candour._]
i--i'd better _tell_ you about that. the--the fact is

[_he starts nervously, as the
hangings of the centre arch are
drawn back once more, the slaves
form a double row, and their chief
appears, beckoning to some one to
follow him._

pringle.

[_heard outside, addressing chief slave._ ] mr. pringle. mr. _spencer_
pringle.... oh, if you can't manage it, it don't matter! [_he enters, and
stares at the salaaming slaves, then round the hall._] my _aunt_!

horace.

[_coming forward._] here you are, eh, old fellow?

[_the slaves go out._

pringle.

[_staring after the slaves._] yes, here i am. [_reproachfully, as he
observes horace's costume._] you _might_ have told me it was a
fancy-dress affair.

horace.

it isn't. i--i'll explain presently.

pringle.

[_sees the futvoyes, and crosses to them._] how do you do again, miss
sylvia? how are you, mrs. futvoye? we meet sooner than we expected, eh?
[_turning to the professor._] well, professor, i suppose _you_ weren't
surprised at finding our good host in--[_he looks round the hall
again_]--this exceedingly snug little sanctum? i must confess _i_ am.

professor futvoye.

my dear fellow, you can't be more surprised than _we_ are!

pringle.

[_with satisfaction._] you don't mean it! [_turning to horace, who is on
the other side of the hall, talking to mrs. futvoye and sylvia_.] then
you've only just got this place finished, eh, ventimore?

horace.

that's all, pringle.

professor futvoye.

to build and decorate such a place as this must have cost a very
considerable sum of money.

horace.

you'd _think_ so, wouldn't you? but it _didn't_.

professor futvoye.

[_coming towards him._] and that costume you're wearing, those negroes in
rich liveries, all this senseless profusion and display we see around
us--are you going to tell me _they_ haven't cost you anything?

horace.

i--i was going to explain about that. it's a most extraordinary thing,
but--well, you remember that old brass bottle i showed you this afternoon?

professor futvoye.

remember it? of course i remember it! but what of it, sir, what _of_ it?

horace.

why--er--in a manner of speaking--everything you see here has--er--more or
less--come out of that bottle

professor futvoye.

[_infuriated._] that is enough, sir, that is enough! you choose to give me
a frivolous answer! i will not submit to be treated like this--i would
rather leave the house at once. and i _will_, too!

[_he makes a movement towards the
arch. sylvia and her mother look
on in distress, and pringle with
secret gratification._

horace.

no, but i haven't finished! you see, it was like this: when i _opened_ the
bottle

professor futvoye.

[_savagely._] tchah! as you seem unable to realise that this is not a fit
time for fooling, i will not stay here to be trifled with. sophia, sylvia,
we must find some other place to dine in!

sylvia.

[_going to horace, and speaking in a rapid undertone._] horace! can't you
see? he _means_ it. you _must_ be serious--or else!

horace.

[_to her._] yes, i see.... professor, i'm sorry. i--i never thought you'd
be annoyed. all i _really_ meant by--by my feeble little joke was to tell
you--in a sort of figurative way, do you see?--that--that my luck has
turned at last.

the others.

[_together._] turned? _how_ turned? what do you mean?

horace.

well, i've got a client.

the others.

[_as before._] a client? how? where? when?

horace.

just after you all left this afternoon. a clinking good client, too! he's
asked me to build him a big country-house, and my commission can't come to
less than seven or eight thousand pounds.

pringle.

[_at the end of a general chorus of surprise._] seven or eight thousand!
[_incredulously._] may we know the name of this wonderful client of yours?

horace.

it's a mr. samuel wackerbath, a big city auctioneer, i believe.

sylvia.

why, he's my godfather!

mrs. futvoye.

an old friend of ours. eliza wackerbath and i were at school together.

horace.

[_to professor._] so you see, sir, i--i'm not so badly off as you thought.
i can afford to--to launch _out_ a bit.

professor futvoye.

[_somewhat mollified._] hardly, i should have thought, to _this_ extent.
however, in the circumstances, i consent to remain.

sylvia.

[_in an undertone to horace._] i thought it was all over with us!

horace.

[_in the same to her._] so did i! but i _think_ i'm out of the cart this
time.

[_he goes up towards the left,
talking to her._

pringle.

[_crossing to the professor; in an undertone._] _so_ glad you decided to
stay, professor. i was really half afraid you'd go--as a protest against
all this ostentation.

[_mrs. futvoye is admiring the
workmanship of the hangings._

professor futvoye.

[_in an undertone to pringle._] i should have done so, pringle, i should
have _done_ so--but for the inconvenience of dining elsewhere at this hour.
[_aloud, to horace._] ventimore! _[pringle joins mrs. futvoye._] i don't
know if _you_ are getting hungry,--but i own _i_ am. will it be long before
they announce dinner?

horace.

[_turning, with a start._] dinner? oh, i _hope_ not--i mean, i _think_ not.

professor futvoye.

i see no table is laid here. [_acidly._] but probably you have an equally
spacious dining-hall adjoining this?

horace.

yes. that is,--_probably_, you know. i mean, it's quite _possible_.

[_the curtains of the arch on left
of centre arch are drawn._

professor futvoye.

do you mean to tell me you haven't settled yet where we _are_ to dine?

horace.

[_at a loss for an instant, then he suddenly sees the slaves enter from the
arch on left, bearing a low round table, which they place in the centre of
the hall._] oh, we dine _here_, of course!--here. i--i leave it to these
fellows.

[_four of the slaves fetch cushions
and arrange them as seats around
the table, the chief slave
directing them._

pringle.

i say, ventimore, what an odd idea of yours, having all these black
footmen! don't you find them a nuisance at times?

horace.

oh, they--they've only come in for the evening. you
see--they're--er--quieter than the ordinary hired waiter--and--and they
don't blow on the top of your head.

sylvia.

[_in an undertone, nervously._] horace! i don't like them! they're so
creepy-crawly, somehow!

horace.

[_suppressing his own antipathy._] after all, darling, we--we mustn't
forget that they're men and brothers. [_to the others, as the chief slave
advances to him and makes elaborate gesticulations._] i think what he
means is that dinner is served. shall we sit down?

mrs. futvoye.

i don't see any _chairs_.

horace.

no. it--it's such a low table, you see. so we sit on cushions. m--much
better fun!

professor futvoye.

[_grimly._] may i ask if the entire dinner is to be carried out on strictly
arabian principles?

horace.

[_helplessly._] i--i rather think that _is_ the idea. i hope you don't
_mind_, professor?

professor futvoye.

i am in your hands, sir, in your hands! sophia!

[_he indicates to mrs. futvoye
that she is expected to sit down,
and seats himself on the right of
table with many precautions;
horace leads mrs. futvoye to a
cushion on his right, and
establishes sylvia on his left,
inviting pringle to the place
below mrs. futvoye and opposite
the professor. a slave brings on
a large covered golden dish, which
he places on the table in front of
horace._

horace.

[_with a pathetic attempt to be cheery, as another slave raises the
cover._] ha! now we shall see what they've _given_ us!

[_the expressions of the party
indicate that, whatever the food
may be, its savour is not exactly
appetising._

professor futvoye.

i should just like to remark that, having lived in the east myself and had
considerable experience of native cooking, i expect to be extremely unwell
to-morrow.

horace.

let's hope for the best, professor, hope for the best! [_turning to the_
chief slave behind him._] but, i say! you've forgotten the knives and
forks. nobody has any! what _are_ these fellows about? [_the chief slave
explains in pantomime that fingers and thumbs are all that is necessary._]
eh? do _without_ them? dip into the dish and help ourselves? oh--if you say
we've _got_ to! [_to mrs. futvoye._] mrs. futvoye, can i persuade you
to--er--have first dip?

mrs. futvoye.

really, horace, i must get my gloves off _first_!

[_she removes them._

horace.

it _does_ seem a little messy. but _quite_ arabian, you know--quite
_arabian_!

mrs. futvoye.

[_vainly trying to reach the dish._] i'm such a long way off!

horace.

yes. i think we'd better all--er--close up a bit.

[_they all work themselves up
uncomfortably on their respective
cushions nearer the table._

professor futvoye.

[_as horace takes mrs. futvoye's and sylvia's right hands and guides
them to the dish._] and he calls this a simple, ordinary little dinner!

curtain

the second act

_the scene is the arabian hall--an
hour later. the slaves are offering
the guests water in golden bowls,
and insisting on wiping their hands
for them, an attention which the_
professor resents._

professor futvoye.

ventimore!

horace.

[_seated in utter dejection._] yes, professor?

professor futvoye.

i infer from the fact that the last course seemed to be something in the
nature of--ah--_sweets_

[_mrs. futvoye and pringle
exchange glances, and sigh
audibly._

horace.

they _were_ rather beastly, weren't they?

[_a slave takes the professor's
hands with great respect, and
inserts them into the bowl._

professor futvoye.

as i was saying, i infer from that, and the circumstance that your
attendant has _again_ attempted to wash my hands, that the--ah--banquet
has come to an end. is that so?

horace.

[_miserably._] i _hope_ so! i mean--i _think_ so.

professor futvoye.

then, as i have been suffering agonies of cramp from having had to sit for
an hour on a cushion with my legs crossed, i should be glad, with your
permission, to stretch them again.

horace.

so sorry! mrs. futvoye, shall we?

[_he helps mrs. futvoye and
sylvia to rise. pringle has also
risen; the professor remains on
his cushion._

professor futvoye.

_i_ should be glad of some slight assistance.

[sylvia comes to him_; horace
and mrs. futvoye are by the
divan on the left._

pringle.

[_crossing in front of table._] allow me, professor, allow me!

[_he helps him to his feet._

professor futvoye.

thank you, pringle, thank you. a word with you--[_drawing him away to the
right, while sylvia joins her mother and horace up on the
left._]--pringle. [_lowering his voice._] i declare to you that never,
_never_ have i been called upon to swallow a more repulsive and generally
villainous meal! and that in a life which has had its--ah--ups and downs!

pringle.

it's the same here, i can assure you. i don't understand our host's
partiality for arab cookery. and the _wine_! [_with a reminiscent
shudder._] _did_ you try the wine?

professor futvoye.

i did. it must have been kept in a goat-skin for years! and yet he must
have spent a perfectly scandalous amount on this preposterous banquet of
his!

pringle.

a small fortune! ah, well--i suppose he feels entitled to indulge in these
costly fancies--_now_.

professor futvoye.

he's no business to--just after he's engaged to my daughter!

pringle.

ah! it's a thousand pities. still--he _may_ give up some of this
magnificence, when he's married.

professor futvoye.

i shall take very good care he does that--if he marries sylvia at all!

[_he lowers his voice still more,
and the conversation continues in
dumb show, pringle by his manner
showing that he is doing all in his
power to prejudice horace while
ostensibly defending him. the
slaves return, clear away cushions,
and remove the table._

horace.

[_to mrs. futvoye, while sylvia stands slightly apart with a somewhat
resentful expression._] it's awfully kind of you to be so nice about
it--but i know only too well you can't _really_ have enjoyed it. it was a
shocking bad dinner from start to finish!

mrs. futvoye.

[_tolerantly._] oh, you mustn't say _that_! perhaps, _next_ time, if you
could tell your landlady not to scent _all_ the dishes _quite_ so strongly
with musk

horace.

i shall certainly mention _that_--if i get the chance. [_looking across at
the professor, whose temper is evidently rising._] i'm afraid the
professor won't get over _this_ in a hurry.

mrs. futvoye.

perhaps i'd better go and see how he's feeling.

[_she crosses, leaving horace
with sylvia._

horace.

[_to sylvia._] i can guess how _you're_ feeling about this.

sylvia.

[_coldly._] can you? then it isn't necessary for me to tell you.

horace.

no, i--this little dinner of mine hasn't turned out quite as we _expected_,
has it?

sylvia.

i don't know what _you_ expected--_i_ thought it was going to be so
delightful!... how _could_ you be so foolish?

horace.

you see, dear, you don't understand how it all came about yet. if you'd
only let me tell you

sylvia.

i think you had much better say no more about it.

horace.

ah, but i can't! i _must_ get it off my chest. [_before he can begin the
slaves enter once more, and shift the divans on either side to lower and
rather more oblique positions, after which the head slave approaches
horace, and makes signs._] what do you want?

sylvia.

[_clinging to horace._] oh, don't let him come too near me!

horace.

[_as the chief slave repeats the signs._] he sha'n't, darling--but he's
quite friendly. he's only suggesting that we should sit down.

[_horace and sylvia sit on the
divan on left. the chief slave
turns to professor and repeats
the gestures._

professor futvoye.

[_puzzled and irritable._] what does he want me to do _now_?

mrs. futvoye.

[_soothingly._] why, to sit down, of course, and take your coffee
_comfortably_.

professor futvoye.

[_appeased._] oh, is _that_ it? [_going to divan on right._] i sha'n't be
sorry to rest my back against something. [_sitting._] you'd better sit down
yourself, sophia.

mrs. futvoye.

[_placidly._] i was going to, anthony.

[_she sits on the professor's left_.

professor futvoye.

plenty of room for _you_, pringle. [_pringle seats himself on professor's
right._] i think i might feel better after a cup of strong
coffee--_turkish_ coffee--and perhaps a glass of _liqueur_ brandy. [_as
the chief slave moves up to the centre arch without paying any attention
to him._] as you said, pringle, the attendance is disgraceful! [_raising
his voice, and calling across to horace._] ventimore, is
your--ah--major-domo--going to bring us our coffee and what not _soon_?

horace.

at once, professor, at _once_!

[_he claps his hands, and the
chief slave stalks forward
majestically._

professor futvoye.

and a cigar--a _good_ cigar, if it's not asking too much?

horace.

what _am_ i thinking of? of course! [_to the chief slave._] serve coffee at
_once_, please. [_the chief slave expresses in pantomime that he fails to
understand horace's desires._] i said "coffee." _you_ know what coffee
is! [_apparently the chief slave does not._] i never saw such a fellow!
well, _cigars_, then! come, you _must_ know _them_! things to smoke? [_he
imitates the action of smoking. the chief slave seems to take this as a
dismissal. he salaams, motions to the other slaves to retire, upon which
they all go out, then salaams once more and stalks off._] that beggar must
be a born idiot! _i_ can't make him understand.

professor futvoye.

[_drily._] so i perceive. no matter, i must do without my usual
after-dinner coffee, that's all! but at least, ventimore, you _must_ know
where to lay your hand on your cigar-box!

horace.

i did--before the place was altered so,--but i'm not sure if[_he
rises._] i'll just go and have a look in my bedroom.

[_he crosses and goes out by the
lower arch on the right._

pringle.

[_to the professor._] seems to me that oriental hospitality has been rather
over-rated!

professor futvoye.

[_gloomily._] ah! i know i wish i'd ordered our cab for ten o'clock,
instead of eleven! receiving us with all this ostentation, and yet grudging
us the most ordinary comforts--i _can't_ understand it!

pringle.

[_rising._] it may be his notion of humour. [_as he moves across to_
sylvia._] if you and mrs. futvoye and miss sylvia will only give me the
pleasure of dining with me some night at the holborn,--or rather the
savoy--i would endeavour to wipe out the memory of this evening's
sufferings.

[_he takes horace's place by
sylvia's side._

professor futvoye.

whenever you please, my dear pringle, whenever you please,--and the sooner
the better! sophia! [_he turns to mrs. futvoye, and discovers that she is
gently dozing._] asleep! how she can _do_ it!--but i won't disturb her now.
[_to horace, who returns from arch down right._] well? have you found
your cigars?

horace.

[_standing in centre depressed._] no. there's nothing in there--except that
beastly brass bottle. i _am_ so sorry!

sylvia.

[_rising and going to horace._] horace! it _is_ all over, isn't it? you're
_sure_ there's nothing _more_ to come?

[_pringle, finding himself
deserted, returns to his place on
the divan by the professor._

horace.

[_looking round anxiously._] i--i _hope_ not. no, i think we're all right.
we shall have no more trouble now all those black johnnies have cleared
out.

[_at this moment there is a
confused sound of oriental
instruments outside, with wailing
cries. sylvia turns from horace,
and goes back indignantly to the
divan on the left. horace
follows, and sits by her._

mrs. futvoye.

[_waking up as the music stops._] dear me! what _is_ that horrible noise?
not cats?

professor futvoye.

cats! no,--it's arab music! [_to horace._] so you've a _fresh_ surprise in
store for us, eh, sir?

horace.

[_forlornly._] it--it _does_ sound rather like it, professor.

[_four negro musicians enter,
playing a tom-tom, mandoline,
flageolet, and native fiddle
respectively, while they chant a
weird ditty, and sit cross-legged,
right and left of the central
arch._

sylvia.

[_as the music stops._] horace, this is really _too_ bad of you! you
_assured_ me there was nothing more coming!

[_she turns her shoulder on him
with marked displeasure._

pringle.

so you keep a private band, do you, ventimore?

horace.

no, no,--of course i don't. it--it's only engaged for the evening.

pringle.

i see. hired from the arab encampment at earl's court, eh?

horace.

[_irritated._] you've guessed it first time, pringle!

pringle.

that's odd. because, now i come to think of it, there _isn't_ any arab
encampment there this season.

horace.

then they come from somewhere else. at all events, they're playing here for
nothing.

professor futvoye.

ah! they know their own value!

mrs. futvoye.

now, anthony, you're finding fault before they've even _begun_! [_she
rises._] that was only _tuning_, of course! [_she passes in front of the
musicians, and then comes down to horace._] can they play _english_ music?
_do_ ask them if they know "the choristers."

horace.

i'm afraid they're not at all likely to be familiar with it.

[_the musicians begin once more,
and mrs. futvoye retreats hastily
to the divan, as they sing and play
for a few bars in hideous
cacophony._

pringle.

[_as they stop once more._] vocal as _well_ as instrumental, eh? are they
going to give us any _more_ little things like that, ventimore?

horace.

no. not if i know it! they've _done_ now!

[_at this the music starts again,
louder and more discordant than
ever._

professor futvoye.

[_springing to his feet in a fury, and shouting._] ventimore! you _must_
put a stop to this abominable din! do you hear? i can't and won't put up
with it!

horace.

[_rising, and going to the musicians._] here, you chaps! hi! that's enough!
[_he claps his hands._] get out! get _out_!

[_the musicians seem to treat
this as an encouragement, for they
play with more vigour than ever;
then, as they reach the climax, the
music changes to slower strains, in
which some sort of air is
recognisable, and a troop of
oriental dancing girls come
writhing and posturing in from the
arches on right and left of the
centre arch. horace recoils in
horror, and collapses on the divan
by sylvia's side._

mrs. futvoye.

[_making her voice carry above the music._] and do these young persons come
from earl's court, _too_?

horace.

[_wildly._] no! oh, _dear_ no! _they_ come from--from harrod's. the
entertainment department, don't you know!

[_he sits paralysed as the
principal dancing girl suddenly
floats down from the central arch,
and executes a slow and sinuous
oriental dance in the middle of the
other performers. the professor
and his wife exchange scandalised
comments, and pringle endeavours
to look shocked and grieved._

horace.

[_as the principal dancing girl has glided down opposite him, and stands
posturing, with her eyes fixed on his face; to sylvia._] i--i don't think
she's _bad_.

sylvia.

[_coldly._] don't you? i'm perfectly _sure_ she is!

horace.

no, no. she--she's a _lady_ and all that. they _all_ are. highly
respectable girls! they only give their dances at _private_ parties.

sylvia.

i don't think you need have engaged them for _yours_! _really_, horace!

[_the music stops; all, except the
principal dancer, who remains
standing and smiling at horace,
fall on their hands and faces in a
line across the stage._

horace.

it was a mistake. but i'll get rid of them! [_he rises and goes towards
the principal dancer._] it's charming--charming--but that will _do_, you
know. you can go away now. you can _all_ of you go away!

[_the principal dancing girl,
with a swift, sudden movement,
throws herself at his feet and
embraces his knees; sylvia starts
up indignantly. the professor,
mrs. futvoye, and pringle rise
also._

principal dancing girl.

[_in arabic, in a tone of adoring submission._] yah sîdî! yah noor ainy!
yah nass al kalbi sîdî!

horace.

[_to the others._] she is a little hysterical, that's all--the artistic
temperament. [_as he succeeds in freeing himself._] i don't know what on
earth she's talking about! i _fancy_ she says she's feeling seedy.

professor futvoye.

[_who has come down on the right._] "sîdî"--as you may well know--is the
ordinary arabic word for "master," and, if i follow her correctly, she is
calling you her protector, the light of her eyes, and the vital spirit of
her heart!

[_the principal dancing girl has
fallen on her hands and face in
front of the others._

sylvia.

oh! so _this_ is what you were trying to confess to me!

horace.

she's quite _mistaken_, you know. _i'm_ not the light of her eyes, i've
never seen her before in all my life!

sylvia.

you think i believe _that_! [_she rushes across to mrs. futvoye._] oh,
mother--mother!

horace.

professor, _you_ know arabic. couldn't you get these people to understand
that they aren't wanted?

professor futvoye.

[_coming forward._] i intend to. [_in arabic._] eerga dugghery gowan illa
bait bettah harrood!

[_as he speaks all the dancing
girls raise their heads in horror,
then rise screaming and holding
their hands to their ears, and rush
out through arches, followed by the
musicians. the moment they
disappear through the arches all is
silent._

pringle.

[_coming down to centre._] they weren't long in taking _your_ hint,
professor. what _did_ you say to them?

professor futvoye.

[_rather puzzled._] i merely told them, in the best arabic i could command,
to go back to harrod's at once.

mrs. futvoye.

i am quite sure they cannot have come from _harrod's_!

horace.

you're perfectly right, mrs. futvoye. they _didn't_.

professor futvoye.

[_advancing to him._] after _that_ admission, you will hardly be surprised
if i tell you--as i _do_--that you may consider your engagement to my
daughter at an end.

horace.

at an end! why, what have i _done_?

professor futvoye.

done, sir, done? you ask _that_, after grossly insulting my wife and
daughter by this--this outrageous exhibition!

[_he goes up, followed by pringle._

horace.

[_going to mrs. futvoye._] mrs. futvoye, _you_ don't misunderstand me, i'm
sure?

mrs. futvoye.

[_icily._] for _once_, i entirely agree with my husband, and i believe
sylvia herself will tell you

[_she turns, and joins the
professor on the left._

horace.

no, she won't? _will_ you, sylvia? _you_ won't give me up?

sylvia.

what else _can_ i do?

horace.

what else? why, trust me, stick to me--in spite of everything and
everybody!

sylvia.

after what i've just seen! no, that's _too_ much to expect!--unless, of
course, you've some satisfactory explanation?

horace.

well, i _have_--if you'll all promise to _listen_ to it--you wouldn't when
i tried to explain before, you know. now you _must_ hear me out! [_they all
prepare to listen attentively._] it's like this. sylvia wasn't far wrong
about that beastly jar i bought this afternoon--there _was_ a jinnee inside
it.

professor futvoye.                  )
)
what? how dare you, sir--how _dare_     )
you trifle with us like this?                )
)
mrs. futvoye.                       )
)
disgraceful! to stand there talking          )
such nonsense--at such a time!               )  _all_
)  _speaking_
sylvia.                             )  _together._
)
turning it all into a _joke_! oh, how   )
can you--how _can_ you?                 )
)
pringle.                            )
)
upon my word, ventimore, you ought           )
to be ashamed of yourself!                   )

horace.

there you _are_, you see! you _won't_ give me a hearing! i _ought_ to know
what was inside the bottle, considering i let it out. fakrash-el--_what_
did he tell me his name was?--oh, aamash--fakrash-el-aamash. he's a jinnee.
of the _green_ jinn.

pringle.

well, _we're_ not green jennies!

horace.

[_losing his temper._] shut up, pringle! this is _my_ story--and you'll be
good enough to let me finish it. well, according to old fakrash, he'd been
sealed up in that bottle by solomon

professor futvoye.

what, in the name of common sense, has all this to do with the case?

horace.

i'm coming to that, if you'll only have a little patience. naturally, he
was grateful to me for letting him out, and, in a weak moment, i--i blurted
out that you were all coming to dinner here to-night. and what does the old
idiot do but transform my rooms into these halls, and provide the whole
entertainment himself! and--as might be expected--it was pretty rotten!

[_he sinks on the divan on right in
despair, as he sees the general
incredulity._

professor futvoye.

ha! and you seriously expect us to believe this cock-and-bull story as an
explanation--unsupported by any kind of proof?

horace.

not _unsupported_, professor! how about these halls?

professor futvoye.

_they_ are only evidence of your unbridled extravagance, sir! where is this
precious jinnee you talk about? produce him--let me see him with my own
eyes, and i might--but, bah! you won't venture to accept that challenge,
i'm sure of that!

[_he crosses to mrs. futvoye and
pringle._

horace.

it's unfortunate--but fakrash has--er--left the country. i don't expect him
back for some time--if at all.

professor futvoye.

nor i, sir, nor _i_! sophia, you and sylvia had better go to the vestibule
and get your things on.

mrs. futvoye.

i am only too anxious to go. [_to sylvia._] come, darling.

[_she moves towards arch on right._

sylvia.

[_in sudden alarm._] mother! _not_ with all those horrid dancing-girls and
things! _they're_ in there!

mrs. futvoye.

[_at arch._] trust me to deal with _them_!

[_she goes out with sylvia._

professor futvoye.

[_going up and calling after them._] make haste, sophia! we must walk till
we get a cab, that's all!

horace.

[_who has risen._] professor, don't go yet. i've just remembered. if you'll
only wait a moment, i believe i can bring you something to prove i've been
telling the simple truth.

[_he goes out by lower arch on
right._

professor futvoye.

[_approaching pringle._] "prove he's been telling the truth!" you heard
_that_, pringle? did you ever hear such bare-faced impudence in all your
life?

pringle.

[_virtuously._] never, professor, never! i _quite_ share your indignation.
perhaps i may be allowed to accompany you? i am going your way.

professor futvoye.

do so, pringle; do so, my dear fellow. as we may have to walk some
distance, my daughter will be glad of your escort. [_as mrs. futvoye and
sylvia appear from arch up right._] ah, they're ready, i see. go and get
your coat on and bring mine, and we'll leave at once.

pringle.

[_with alacrity, as he goes up._] by all means, professor! i won't be a
minute.

[_he goes out by the arch up
right._

horace.

[_returning at the same moment from lower arch on right._] i've had a
hunt--but i've found it. [_he offers a metal cap to the professor._] now,
if you'll only examine _this_, professor.

professor futvoye.

what do you mean by offering me that piece of dirty old metal, sir? take
the thing away!

horace.

it's the cap or stopper that belongs to that brass bottle. and, i don't
know, but i rather fancy there's something engraved on it.

professor futvoye.

eh, what? [_he takes the cap._] so far as i can tell by feeling it, there
_does_ seem to be--but what if there is--what if there _is_?

horace.

well, it _might_ refer to a jinnee having been bottled up by solomon, don't
you know.

professor futvoye.

bah!--but no matter. [_he slips the cap into his tail-coat pocket._]
whatever it is, i _will_ examine this inscription--after breakfast
to-morrow morning. [_triumphantly._] and i shall _decipher_ it, sir,--you
may depend upon that! [_to pringle, who returns with coat and helps him
into it._] thank you, my boy, thank you. now, sophia,--if you are ready!

mrs. futvoye.

i am only waiting for _you_, anthony. [_frostily, to horace._] mr.
ventimore, i will wish you good-night.

[_she goes out by central arch._

pringle.

[_approaching sylvia._] good-night, ventimore. miss sylvia--[_offering his
arm_]--i am to have the privilege of taking care of you.

sylvia.

[_declining his arm._] thank you, mr. pringle,--but i can quite well take
care of myself. [_she turns to horace._] horace, i want to say just this
before i go--i _will_ trust you still,--in spite of everything and
everybody!

horace.

[_putting his arm round her._] you little _brick_! and you won't have to go
on trusting me _much_ longer!

professor futvoye.

[_interposing and separating them._] that she will not, sir! let her go!
[_horace releases sylvia, who goes up towards central arch, horace
attempting to follow her, when he is stopped by the professor._] stay
where you are!

[_sylvia and pringle pass through
to the outer hall._

horace.

surely i may go as far as the door with her!

professor futvoye.

[_by the central arch._] not another step, sir! one last word. this
precious seal of yours will enable me to expose you as a shameless liar.
that is all i have to say. _good_ evening.

[_he goes out. pause, the front
door is heard to slam._

horace.

[_to himself, in despair._] gone! she's gone! [_he flings himself down on
the divan on the left, with his face to the audience._] the professor may
be right--the seal _mayn't_ be solomon's! how do _i_ know old fakrash
hasn't been lying? and if he has--well, i'm done for! [_fakrash suddenly
appears through the hangings, comes down to the divan, and touches horace
on the shoulder; horace starts, then swings round to a sitting posture,
facing fakrash._] eh? so you _have_ come back!

fakrash.

[_benevolently._] may thy head long survive!

horace.

[_choking with rage._] if you'd only turned up four minutes earlier i could
have introduced you to my guests. it's too late _now_!

fakrash.

thou hast dismissed them already?

horace.

they've gone, anyhow.

fakrash.

[_beaming._] and were they not astounded by the magnificence of thy
dwelling and the liberality of their entertainment?

horace.

distinctly so. but i warn you--don't you press me on the subject of that
entertainment. i can't trust myself to talk about it just yet.

fakrash.

render me no thanks.

horace.

[_exasperated._] thanks! _thanks!!_

fakrash.

i perceive that something hath displeased thee.

horace.

[_with an angry laugh._] no, _do_ you? you're getting quite observant!
something jolly well _has_ displeased me. not so much the banquet--i could
pass that--we _did_ pass _most_ of it! [_rising._] it was what came _after_
the banquet!

fakrash.

after the banquet i provided that a company of houris, lovelier than the
full moon and graceful as young gazelles, should dance for the delight of
thy guests. [_with uneasiness._] can i have failed in bringing this to
pass?

horace.

[_bitterly._] oh, you brought _that_ off all right--the houris _came_!
[_with rising resentment._] and what do you think the chief gazelle
_did_?... hugged my knees and called me her lord and protector and the
light of her eyes! pretty good that--for a gazelle!

fakrash.

[_with a fatuous smile of approval._] excellent indeed!

horace.

[_turning on him._] perhaps, when i tell you that the company included the
young lady i was engaged to marry--_and_ her father and mother, and that
they put the most unfavourable construction on the houri's behaviour, it
_may_ begin to dawn, even on _you_, that you might have been more tactful!
i've _lost_ sylvia now--and all through you and your confounded gazelle!

fakrash.

[_pulling his beard, and appearing slightly disconcerted._] verily thy
fortune is unlucky! but dismiss uneasiness, for to remedy this mischance
will be the simplest thing possible.

horace.

[_more mildly._] oh, if you'll do _that_! but how?

fakrash.

[_standing in centre of hall._] by procuring thee another bride of far
greater beauty and accomplishments.

horace.

[_striding past him in a fury._] _another!_ you--you _hopeless_ old ass!
_can't_ you understand?

fakrash.

[_seizing his arm, and bringing him down the stage._] wait! thou hast not
yet heard the list of her perfections. a forehead shall she have like the
gleaming dome of a temple, eyes like unto blazing lamps, a nose that
shineth brighter than a sword, teeth resembling pearls strung on native
gold, a bosom

horace.

stop, i tell you! i don't _want_ her--i won't _have_ her! i want sylvia,
and i'll marry nobody else! just get _that_ into your muddled old head,
will you! if you can't pull me out of this mess you've got me into, why the
deuce have you come back at all?

[_he sits on the divan on left._

fakrash.

i am returned to impart unto thee wondrous intelligence.

horace.

oh? well, fire away. take a cushion.

[_flinging him one from the divan._

fakrash.

[_squatting on cushion._] hearken! during my wanderings i have learnt that,
beyond all doubt, suleymán, the son of dáood, sleeps with his fathers!

horace.

as a matter of fact, he's been doing that for about three thousand years.

fakrash.

sayest thou so? then--[_cunningly_]--tell me. doth there still remain any
one of suleymán's seed that exerciseth his authority over them of the jinn?

horace.

no. as soon as you've made things right for _me_, you can go off to your
own country and settle down comfortably--there's no power on earth that can
interfere with you.

fakrash.

then--before i do thee any further service--bring hither the stopper
wherewith my bottle was sealed.

horace.

[_uneasily._] the--the stopper? oh, nonsense! you can't want that _now_!
what for? as a _souvenir_?

fakrash.

nay, but because in all likelihood it is engraven with the mighty seal of
suleymán.

horace.

[_rising excitedly._] i say! are you _sure_ of that?

fakrash.

so it was customary with such vessels. and, bearing such a seal, i shall
possess a mighty talisman. [_rising from his cushion._] wherefore deliver
it into my hands without delay, and i will reward thee by accomplishing all
thy desires.

horace.

[_in extreme embarrassment._] i--i'd be only too happy to oblige you--if i
could. but--well, the fact is, i've just parted with it.

fakrash.

[_advancing on him in sudden fury._] _parted_ with it! with my seal! o thou
of little sense! to whom? to _whom_, i say?

horace.

to the father of the lady i was engaged to. he's a learned man, you see,
and i knew, if there _was_ anything engraved on the seal, he'd be able to
make it out.

fakrash.

[_striding up and down the hall, and brandishing his arms._] perdition
seize thee! for he will assuredly refuse to surrender such a talisman! woe
to me, for i am undone! undone! undone!

horace.

don't talk rot! you _aren't_ undone--and nobody wants to undo you! [_fakrash
utters wild cries._] don't go howling about like that--sit down again and
be sensible.

fakrash.

[_halting opposite horace, with a menacing gesture._] take heed to
thyself! for if thou dost not restore my seal immediately!

horace.

[_facing him composedly._] it's no good trying to bully _me_, you know.
_i'm_ not afraid of you. you sit down and be civil, and promise to do
exactly as i tell you--or i'm hanged if i help you to get your seal back.

fakrash.

[_with sudden self-restraint._] my son, it was naught! am i not thy
servant? on the head and eye be all thy commands!

[_he sits down on the cushion._

horace.

ah, that's better! [_he goes to the divan and gets himself a cushion, then
sits facing fakrash._] now i'll tell you an idea that's just struck
me--the professor said himself that nothing would convince him but seeing
you with his own eyes. well--why shouldn't you _go_ to him?

fakrash.

[_eagerly._] tell me where he hath his abode, and i will visit him this
same instant.

[_about to rise._

horace.

[_stopping him._] no, you don't! just when he'll be turning in! you'll go
about ten o'clock to-morrow morning, when he's had his breakfast--or you
won't go at all!

fakrash.

be it so! i will restrain my impatience until the morrow. but the place of
his dwelling?

horace.

wait a bit. i won't have him rattled. [_fakrash looks puzzled._] i mean, no
popping up through the floor or down the chimney. you'll just walk quietly
up to his front door, and ask to see him. then you can explain who you are
and what you want, and, if you're decently polite, i'm sure the professor
will give you back your property.

fakrash.

all these instructions will i observe.

horace.

but you can't go in _that_ get-up, or you'll have a crowd of small boys at
your heels. couldn't you raise the sort of costume respectable elderly
gentlemen go about in nowadays?

fakrash.

i hear and obey. to assume such garb as is worn by aged dwellers in this
city will be the simplest affair possible!

horace.

all right, then. and you must go to no. 47 cottesmore gardens, kensington,
and ask whoever lets you in if you may see professor futvoye. think you can
remember all that?

fakrash.

[_rising._] indelibly is it inscribed upon the tablet of memory. to-morrow,
then, at the appointed hour, will i repair to the abode of this sage.

horace.

[_who has risen at the same time as fakrash, and thrown the cushions back
on the divan._] good! and you'd better come on to me afterwards and let me
know how you got on. not _here_--at my office, great college street,
westminster. got _that_ down on your tablet?

fakrash.

it is done. and now, o young man of abundant talents and obliging
disposition, i will take my leave of thee. [_going to centre of hall._] for
i must seek my palace in the garden of irem and repose myself until it be
day. but--[_turning_]--ere i depart, tell me by what service i can reward
thy kindness?

horace.

well,--if you _really_ want to do me a good turn,--you might change these
halls again.

fakrash.

what? are they insufficient for thy dignity?

horace.

no, no--they're much too grand! i--i want my old rooms back!

fakrash.

[_pained._] of what avail is it to confer favours upon _thee_, since thou
rejectest them every one!

horace.

[_approaching him, and speaking soothingly._] no, not every one. there was
old wackerbath--the client you sent me--i haven't rejected _him_. i'm going
to build him a country-house.

fakrash.

ha! and on what spot is this mansion to be erected?

horace.

oh, he seems to have got an excellent site--on a hill near lipsfield,
between hampshire and surrey.

fakrash.

[_touching his own brow._] it is on the tablet! and have no anxiety,--for
the palace that will arise shall assuredly be the wonder of the universe!

horace.

very kind of you to say so--when i haven't even begun to work at it yet.
and now--about these halls? [_persuasively._] you _will_ turn 'em back into
my old rooms, won't you? you're such a deuced clever old johnny--i mean,
_jinnee_!

fakrash.

into the mean habitation in which i found thee? far be this action from me!

horace.

[_impatiently._] oh, i'm sick of _arguing_ with you--i _command_ you. on
the head and on the eye!

rapkin's voice.

[_from the outer hall._] mr. ventimore! i want a _word_ with you!

horace.

[_to fakrash, quickly._] you hear? that's my landlord,--it's _his_ house,
not mine. just you change it--quick--before he comes in!

fakrash.

[_standing in centre._] since thou insisteth. and be of light heart, for
by to-morrow all thine affairs will prosper exceedingly!

[_he waves his hand; there is a
sudden and complete darkness for a
few seconds, with the sounds of
rumbling and rushing wind as
before. above this the rapkins'
voices are heard._

rapkin's voice.

turned off the lights, 'as he? but _i'll_ talk to 'im when i _see_ 'im!

mrs. rapkin's voice.

don't let go of my 'and, rapkin! i _know_ there's some o' them nasty
niggers about!

rapkin's voice.

'im and his bloomin' niggers and arabian 'alls! [_bawling._] mr. ventimore!
you _'ear_ me!

[_the stage has been growing
gradually lighter, and mr. and
mrs. rapkin are seen standing
together in the room in which the
play opened._

horace.

[_appearing at bedroom door on right, in smoking suit, holding candle._]
perfectly. [_blandly._] anything the _matter_, rapkin?

rapkin.

[_looking round open-mouthed, and blinking in bewilderment._] matter, sir?
no, sir. nothink, sir. not _now_, sir!

horace.

[_sweetly._] glad to hear it. you'll be all right in the morning. hot water
at the usual time, please. _good_ night!

[_he goes into his bedroom, leaving
the stage in darkness again as the
curtain falls._

end of the second act.

the third act

scene i

_the scene represents horace's
_office in great college street._

_it is a small room, panelled in
dark oak. on the left is an old
mantelpiece in white and yellow
marble. beyond the fireplace is a
door communicating with pringle's
_office. on the right is a recessed
window, through which the top of an
old grey wall with chevaux-de-frise
and foliage above can be seen. at
the back, on the right, is a door
leading to the staircase. on the
left of this door, an architect's
cabinet, with narrow drawers for
plans, &c. on the walls are plans
and architectural drawings, a
t-square or two, an office
calendar, and sections of
mouldings, sundry cards of tiling,
ornamental fittings, &c., sent out
by firms as advertisements to
architects. on the right, by the
window, is an architect's
drawing-table, with a sheet of
drawing-paper, tracing-paper,
saucers of colour, and other usual
requisites of an architect._

_the time is 11.30 on the morning
after the preceding acts._

_as the curtain rises, the
westminster clock-tower chimes the
half-hour._

horace is drawing at the table on
right._

horace.

[_to himself, looking at watch._] half-past eleven already!--and i haven't
heard from _either_ of them yet! [_with some anxiety._] very odd! can
anything have? [_there is a knock at the door on the left. horace
turns with a slight start as pringle enters._] oh, it's you, pringle!
[_after a pause._] none the worse after last night, i hope?

pringle.

[_very solemnly._] i am feeling no ill-effects at _present_. [_coming to
centre of room._] can i have a few words with you?

horace.

[_going on designing._] well, only a _very_ few. we may be interrupted at
any moment. i've appointments with _two_ people this morning. looks as if
they'd _both_ overslept themselves.

pringle.

[_gravely, as he plants himself with his back to the fireplace._] i shall
not detain you long. i merely wish to explain my position. when i accepted
your invitation last night, i did so with the loyal intention of resigning
myself, as cheerfully as possible, to your engagement to miss futvoye

horace.

[_wheeling his chair round so as to face him._] instead of which you put a
spoke in my wheel whenever you got the chance! not behaving quite
decently, _was_ it?

pringle.

[_stiffly._] after last night, i cannot consider _you_ as an authority on
_decency_.

horace.

don't rub it in, pringle!

pringle.

as i was saying, i came prepared to leave the field to you--for i am not
the sort of man to unsettle any girl's affections

horace.

that's your modesty, pringle! you don't realise how dangerous you _are_!

pringle.

[_ignoring this._] i was going to say--so long as she continues engaged to
_another_. but if miss sylvia doesn't recognise yet that you are utterly
unworthy of her, she very soon _will_. then _my_ chance will come--and i've
every intention of taking it.

horace.

sorry to discourage you, my dear pringle--but your chance hasn't come yet,
and it's not over likely to come at all.

[_he turns to his work again._

pringle.

she'll never marry you without her father's consent--and if you'd heard him
last night in the cab!

horace.

[_easily._] i daresay. but he'll be very different this morning.

pringle.

[_who has come nearer to him._] why, you're not trusting to that trumpery
seal of yours to convince him?

horace.

no. i'm trusting to something--or rather somebody--[_turning to him_]--who
will be more convincing than any seal.

pringle.

it will take a good deal to reconcile him, or any of them, to such an
extremely--er--oriental interior as you rejoice in.

horace.

the oriental interior has gone, pringle,--vanished into space!

pringle.

nonsense! how could solidly constructed halls like those vanish in a night?

horace.

i don't pretend to know _how_--but they _have_, and that's enough for _me_!

[_he returns to his drawing._

pringle.

[_going back to fireplace._] and this client of yours--has _he_ vanished,
too?

horace.

old wackerbath? oh, no; he's much too solid to vanish--he's only a trifle
late!

pringle.

i shouldn't make too sure of him.

horace.

[_listening._] i fancy he's coming upstairs now. [_rises and goes to door
at back, then stops with a sudden recollection._] unless it's the _other_
one!

pringle.

the _other_ one? so you've _two_ clients!

horace.

no, only one. the other--isn't a client. [_half to himself, as he comes
down._] awkward if they happened to _meet_! i never thought of that!
[_there is a loud knock at the door to staircase._] well, here's _one_ of
'em, anyhow! come in! [_mr. wackerbath opens the door, and stands on the
threshold, breathing hard, and purple and speechless with rage. horace
goes towards him._] it _is_ mr. wackerbath! how do you do? [_pleasantly._]
i was beginning to be afraid[_he notices mr. wackerbath's
expression._] eh? has anything happened?

mr. wackerbath.

happened, sir? yes, something _has_ happened! which you'll be good enough
to explain--if you _can_!

horace.

oh? [_turning to pringle._] perhaps, pringle, if you wouldn't mind?

pringle.

[_moving to the door on the left._] oh, by all means!

mr. wackerbath.

[_to pringle._] stop, sir! don't you run away! for all _i_ know, _you_ may
have had a hand in this disgraceful business!

pringle.

[_with dignity._] i occupy the adjoining office, sir, and i am in practice
as an architect. but i have no business connection with mr. ventimore--none
whatever.

[_offering to go._

mr. wackerbath.

you will oblige me by staying. i should like your opinion--as an
architect--on the way i've been treated.

[_he puts down his hat on the
cabinet by the door._

pringle.

oh, if mr. ventimore has no objection

horace.

well--oh, stay if you think proper. [_to mr. wackerbath, offering
armchair on left of table._] now, sir; if you'll sit down and compose
yourself

mr. wackerbath.

i will _not_ sit down, sir, and i find it difficult to compose myself. you
know very well _why_!

horace.

i don't, indeed. unless--unless you've discovered the--the means by which
you were induced to come to me yesterday. but, after all, there's no great
_harm_ done.

mr. wackerbath.

[_bursting with rage._] no great harm! you can stand there and tell me
_that_!

horace.

[_calmly._] certainly. if you prefer to go to some other architect, you're
perfectly free to do so.

mr. wackerbath.

[_frantically._] free! _free!!_ when the damned house is _built_!

horace and pringle.

[_together, each starting back._] built?

mr. wackerbath.

built, sir, built! when my wife and i saw it on our way to the station this
morning, we could hardly believe our eyes. but my coachman--who's not given
to imagination--saw it as plain as we did. [_horace hears all this with
stupefaction at first, and then with growing comprehension._] and,
considering i only gave you the commission yesterday afternoon, i should
like to know how the devil you managed to put up such a place in the time?

pringle.

my dear sir, as a professional man, let me assure you it would be
impossible--quite impossible. it must have been due to some effect of
mirage.

mr. wackerbath.

mirage, indeed! we got out of the carriage and climbed the slope and went
all over the building! are you going to tell me we've been all over a
_mirage_?

horace.

[_half to himself._] oh, the blithering old idiot!

mr. wackerbath.

[_turning on him suddenly._] are you addressing _me_, sir?

horace.

no, no; not _you_! of course not. [_with a groan._] i told him, like a
fool, where the site was--and he's done the rest during the night!

[_the door at the back flies open,
and fakrash appears. he is
wearing a very tall hat with a wide
flat brim, a frock-coat, baggy
shepherd's plaid trousers fitting
tightly over his ankles, and
oriental shoes._

fakrash.

greeting to ye, o company!

[_mr. wackerbath and pringle turn
in surprise._

horace.

[_sinking helplessly into his chair; half to himself._] it's with _you_,
partner! [_in an undertone to fakrash._] take off your hat!

[_fakrash removes his tall hat with
both hands, and places it on the
top of mr. wackerbath's hat. mr.
wackerbath, annoyed, goes to
cabinet and removes his own hat._

fakrash.

[_to mr. wackerbath._] if i mistake not, thou art the wealthy merchant for
whom this my son hath undertaken to erect a mansion?

mr. wackerbath.

i am, sir. and you, i presume, are mr. ventimore, senior?

horace.

no, he isn't--he's no relation of _mine_!

fakrash.

[_to mr. wackerbath, proudly._] is he not an architect of divine skill,
and hath he not built thee a palace that might cause even the gall of a
sultan to burst with envy?

mr. wackerbath.

it very nearly made _me_ burst, sir, i can tell you that!

fakrash.

i marvel not, for verily it is a lordly dwelling for such as thou.

mr. wackerbath.

"lordly!" _you_ can call it what you like. _i_ call it a tom-fool cross
between the brighton pavilion and the palm-house at kew! no
billiard-room--and not a sign of any drainage system! and you have the
brass--the--the unblushing effrontery to expect me to accept it as a
first-class country-house with every modern convenience!

pringle.

i _must_ say that, in all my professional experience, i _never_

horace.

[_rising and approaching mr. wackerbath._] i'd better explain, mr.
wackerbath. it seems that my old--er--friend here has, with the mistaken
notion that he was helping me, built this palace for you himself. i haven't
_seen_ it--but, from what i know of his talents in that line, it can't be
half a bad sort of place--in its way. and, anyhow, i shouldn't dream of
making any charge under the circumstances. we make you a _present_ of
it--perhaps you didn't understand _that_? so, surely you will accept it in
the--the spirit in which it was intended, what?

mr. wackerbath.

_accept_ it! see the finest position in the neighbourhood occupied by a
jerry-built moorish nightmare? be the laughing-stock of the whole county?
they'd call it "wackerbath's folly"! i won't have it on _my_ land a day
longer than i can help! i'll go to law, sir, and _compel_ you and your
officious partner here to pull the thing down! i--i'll fight the case as
long as i can stand!

fakrash.

[_who has been regarding him through this speech with glowering eyes._] "as
long as thou canst stand"? that will be for no long period, o thou
litigious one! [_he points at him with his forefinger._] on all fours--[_mr.
wackerbath starts in speechless indignation, and bends slightly
forward_]--thankless dog that thou art, and crawl henceforth for the
remainder of thy days!

mr. wackerbath.

how _dare_ you address me in that way, sir! how[_he suddenly drops
forward on his hands._] i will _not_ go down on all fours! do you hear,
sir? i will not!

pringle.

[_horrified._] but--great heavens, sir, you _are_ on all fours!

horace.

[_seizing fakrash's arm._] now, fakrash--just you stop this!

fakrash.

[_shaking horace off._] let me be! [_to mr. wackerbath._] begone, o
contemptible of aspect! to thy kennel!

mr. wackerbath.

[_almost whining, as he crawls distractedly about on all fours._] i can't!
i won't! i _can't_ cross westminster bridge like this! what will the
officials think at waterloo, where i've been known and respected for years?
how am i to face my wife and family in--in my present position? i _insist_
on getting up!

pringle.

then, my dear sir, why _don't_ you? why _humour_ him?

mr. wackerbath.

why, why? because i can't _help_ myself! damn it, sir, do you suppose i'm
doing this for my own amusement? [_to fakrash._] here, turn off your
will-power, or whatever it is, and let me up! _do_ let me up!

horace.

[_in disgust._] i'll not _have_ it, fakrash! let him up at once!

fakrash.

far be this action from me! this son of a burnt dog hath dared to disdain a
palace--therefore let his abode be in the dust for evermore!

mr. wackerbath.

[_crawling to horace._] you--you _quite_ misunderstood me--i haven't a
_word_ to say against the palace. it's the very place i _wanted_!
[_crawling up to fakrash._] if--if you'll only let me up, i--i'll _live_ in
it--'pon my honour i will!

horace.

[_with authority, to fakrash._] let this unfortunate gentleman up, will
you! i _command_ you. both on the head and eye!

fakrash.

[_sullenly, to horace._] but for the magnitude of thy services! be it
as thou wilt. [_he extends his arm over mr. wackerbath._] rise! [_mr.
wackerbath rises and drops into chair by table, exhausted._] depart, and
show us the breadth of thy shoulders.

[_mr. wackerbath gets up, puffing,
and backs to the door._

horace.

[_going towards him with concern._] my dear sir, you _must_ believe _i've_
had no share in this! i--i really don't know how to apologise

mr. wackerbath.

[_with his eyes on fakrash._] don't mention it, sir, _pray_ don't mention
it. i am perfectly satisfied--_perfectly_!

horace.

you _shall_ be, very soon. fakrash, clear that palace away at once. sharp,
now!

mr. wackerbath.

[_nervously, to fakrash._] no, no, i couldn't think of troubling you. i--i
couldn't _wish_ for a more delightful residential mansion, i assure you!

horace.

[_coming to fakrash._] i've told you to obliterate that palace, fakrash. am
i to tell you _twice_?

fakrash.

hath not this overfed father of dogs--[_mr. wackerbath starts, but controls
his resentment immediately_]--expressed his satisfaction with it?

horace.

it won't do, fakrash! do as you're told--and be quick about it.

fakrash.

verily such a palace would but be defiled by his presence--therefore let it
be annihilated. [_he stalks to the window, which flies open at a wave of
his hand, after which he faces it and mutters an incantation._] pfpht!
[_all start._] it is accomplished. of the palace and all the splendours
therein there remaineth not a trace!

horace.

[_going up to mr. wackerbath._] mr. wackerbath, you will find on your
return that that _is_ so. i've only to apologise once more for all
the--er--inconvenience you've been put to.

mr. wackerbath.

[_near the door._] not at all--not at all, i assure you. [_turning to_
fakrash._] i haven't quite caught your name, my dear sir, but you must allow
me to thank you for the--ah--very handsome manner in which you have met me.

fakrash.

[_with a menacing movement._] begone, i say! [_mr. wackerbath snatches his
hat from cabinet._] or thou mayst find thyself in some yet _more_
unfortunate predicament.

mr. wackerbath.

[_at the door._] quite so--quite so! er--delightful weather, isn't it?
[_opening door._] good morning, gentlemen. [_fakrash makes another
movement._] good morning.

[_he goes out hurriedly._

[_fakrash turns to the window and
stands there with folded arms,
looking out in sombre abstraction.
pringle and horace are on the
other side of the room._

pringle.

[_going towards the door to his office, and lowering his voice._] i don't
think you'll see any more of mr. wackerbath after _this_.

horace.

[_in an undertone._] no, i've lost _him_--thanks to that old busybody over
there. he's done _my_ business!

pringle.

it serves you right for having him about. where on earth did you pick him
up? who _is_ he?

horace.

surely you don't need to be told! why, he's the old jinnee who was inside
the bottle.

pringle.

rats!--excuse the vulgarity!

horace.

hang it! you _must_ have noticed _something_ queer about him!

pringle.

i _have_--and if _he's_ the person you're relying on to remove the
professor's objections, i think the old gentleman should be warned against
seeing him.

[_he goes into his office and shuts
the door; horace returns to
table, takes up the sheet on which
he had been working, crumples it
up, and flings it away._

fakrash.

[_turns from window to horace._] receive news! henceforth i shall cease to
busy myself about thine affairs.

horace.

[_sardonically._] that's the best news i've heard from you--so far.

fakrash.

[_gloomily._] uneasiness hath entered into my heart and i am sore troubled.

horace.

so you _ought_ to be after your latest performance. i suppose you know
you've wrecked my chances as an architect? but never mind that now--have
you found time to look up the professor yet?

fakrash.

i have but lately parted from him.

[_he comes to fireplace._

horace.

and you went to cottesmore gardens in _that_ kit? [_amused in spite of
himself._] if you could only _see_ yourself!

fakrash.

didst thou not order me to assume such apparel as is worn in this city?

horace.

i didn't say on the 5th of november! however, you _saw_ him. did you get
your seal back?

fakrash.

nay, for the sage protested that he had mislaid it!

horace.

oh, well, never mind--it'll turn up in time. what i _really_ want to know
is whether you convinced him that you'd come out of the brass bottle?

fakrash.

[_sombrely._] as to that i can tell thee naught. on hearing that i came
from thee, he reviled me as a person of no reputation, and threatened to
summon a certain constable and have me delivered into custody. whereupon i
took measures--[_he smiles cunningly_]--to ensure his silence.

horace.

[_falling back in his chair in sudden terror._] his--_silence_! you--you
old _devil_! you--you've not--_killed_ him!

fakrash.

nay, nay, i have not so much as harmed a hair of his head.

horace.

[_rising._] phew! what a fright you gave me! [_moving towards fireplace,
then turning._] but you've been up to _some_ devilry or other--i'm sure of
it. what _have_ you done to him? out with it!

fakrash.

[_going up towards door._] it was necessary for my security to--[_at
door_]--transform him into a one-eyed mule.

horace.

[_petrified with horror._] a one-eyed _what_!

fakrash.

[_walks through the door, then turns, remaining visible through the door
panels._] a one-eyed mule of hideous appearance. farewell to thee.

[_he disappears; horace seizes
his hat and rushes madly out as the
curtain falls._

end of the first scene of the third act.

scene ii

_the scene represents the
drawing-room at 47 cottesmore
gardens, kensington._

_it is a pleasant room, tastefully
furnished. on the left a recessed
fireplace, in which are ferns; on
the mantelpiece are some large blue
and white beakers and vases. on the
right a bay-window and window-seat.
the windows are wide open, showing
window-boxes filled with scarlet
geraniums and marguerites, and a
quiet street with detached houses.
at the back, on the right, is a
door opening on the hall. to the
left of this door are sliding-doors
shutting off the professor's
_study. in front of these
sliding-doors is a long high backed
sofa, completely covered in chintz,
the flounce of which touches the
floor. at the rising of the curtain
these doors are closed. behind them
are curtains. near the fireplace
are an armchair and a small table.
against the wall, below the
fireplace, is a cabinet. between
the sliding-doors and the door to
the hall is another cabinet with
door, which, when opened, shows
shelves filled with ancient
pottery. above the bay-window is a
bureau. below it are a sofa and a
small table._

_as the curtain rises mrs. futvoye
_is seen seated in chair by the
fireplace, trying to do some
embroidery, though her thoughts are
evidently elsewhere. from behind
the sliding-doors proceed sounds as
of some animal kicking and
plunging._

sylvia's voice is then heard crying_: "father, please don't!" [_a
succession of dull thuds as of battering hoofs._] "oh, _do_ take care!"

mrs. futvoye.

[_lays down her work, rises, goes to the sliding-doors, and knocks._]
anthony! _don't_ go on like that, for goodness' sake! you _must_ try and
control yourself! just _think_, if the _servants_ heard you! [_jessie, a
neat parlour-maid in morning costume, pink print, cap, and apron, enters
from hall; mrs. futvoye hurriedly leaves the sofa by the sliding-doors,
goes back to her chair, and takes up her work with an elaborate assumption
of perfect calm._] what is it, jessie? i haven't rung.

jessie.

i know, madam. but there's such a noise in the master's study i was afraid
something had happened.

mrs. futvoye.

[_severely._] then it was very _foolish_ of you. what _should_ have
happened? if you heard _anything_, it probably came from next door.

[_sounds of stamping from within
sliding-doors, and then a noise as
if some piece of furniture had been
overturned._

jessie.

there it is _again_, madam! and it _does_ seem to come from the study!

[_sounds as before, rather louder._

mrs. futvoye.

oh, _that_? that's nothing, nothing! the professor is merely shifting some
of the furniture.

jessie.

[_evidently devoured by curiosity._] won't he find it too much for him,
madam? perhaps i might be able to help.

[_she makes a movement towards the
sliding-doors._

mrs. futvoye.

you're not to go in there! you know your master allows _nobody_ to touch
his things. i can't have him disturbed.

[_more stamping and banging--then a
crash of broken glass._

jessie.

he seems to be disturbing of _himself_, madam--just had an accident with
something. hadn't i better go in and clear it up?

[_she again makes a movement
towards the sliding-doors._

mrs. futvoye.

certainly not! leave the room and attend to your work. [_the front door
bell rings._] good gracious! the visitors' bell! jessie, i'm not at home!
_nobody_ is at home! _whoever_ it is, mind!

jessie.

[_who has gone to the door leading to the hall and opened it, turns to
mrs. futvoye._] i forgot to mention it, madam, but after that foreign
gentleman called to see the master this morning, i found there's something
wrong with the catch of the front door--leastways, i can't get it to shut,
do what i will.

[_pringle comes in through the door
which jessie is holding open._

mrs. futvoye.

[_rises and makes a step forward._] mr. pringle! you can go, jessie.

[_jessie goes out with an air of
baffled curiosity._

pringle.

[_shaking hands with mrs. futvoye._] pray excuse my coming in
unannounced--but it's rather urgent.

mrs. futvoye.

how do you do, mr. pringle? [_indicating the sofa below the window._] do
sit down.

pringle.

i feel reassured already. i had a dreadful apprehension that i might come
_too late_.

mrs. futvoye.

[_with a pathetic attempt to maintain appearances._] half past twelve is
surely _quite_ early enough. not that i am anything but delighted to see
_you_, at _any_ time.

pringle.

you are very kind. [_he sits down._] but--to be quite frank--i called to
see the professor. could i have a word or two with him at once?

mrs. futvoye.

[_who has taken a chair near the sofa._] i'm _so_ sorry--but that's really
impossible just now.

pringle.

indeed? i trust he is not unwell--after last night?

mrs. futvoye.

n--not _unwell_ exactly. but--not _quite_ his usual self.

[_more noise from study, and
sylvia's voice heard exclaiming:_
"papa! papa!"

pringle.

[_looking round._] he seems to be in his study,--and i thought i heard miss
sylvia's voice.

mrs. futvoye.

yes--yes--he--he's particularly busy this morning.

[_increased noise._

pringle.

[_puzzled._] so it appears. but--[_rising_]--i wouldn't interrupt him for
long, and it really is _most_ important.

mrs. futvoye.

[_rising in agitation._] i do assure you he can see _nobody_ at present.

[_she seats herself, persuading him
to sit down also._

pringle.

but, mrs. futvoye,--if you knew what i have discovered!

mrs. futvoye.

[_rising again._] discovered!

pringle.

about ventimore. i want to put the professor on his guard against receiving
any--er--emissary from him.

mrs. futvoye.

[_slightly relieved._] oh, he's not likely to do _that_--he has _much_ more
important matters to think about!

[_the noise is renewed; stamping,
plunging, overturned chairs._

pringle.

just so. then--if i might speak to miss sylvia?

mrs. futvoye.

[_hastily._] _she_ is very busy too, helping my husband. [_here the noise
reaches its finale in a resounding crash and clatter of falling furniture
and shivered glass; mrs. futvoye proceeds without appearing to have
noticed it._] he--he sometimes makes use of her as--as his amanuensis.

[_the sliding-doors are suddenly
run back, and sylvia appears. she
does not see pringle, who has
risen and moved to the right, from
which position he can see into the
study. mrs. futvoye makes a
movement towards her to check any
disclosures._

sylvia.

[_in despair._] oh, mother! mother! you _must_ come to father! he's kicking
worse than ever, and i can't manage him any longer!

pringle.

[_to himself, recoiling, after a glance through the sliding-doors, off._]
my _hat_!

mrs. futvoye.

[_warningly, as sylvia carefully closes sliding-doors, pushes the sofa
aside, and comes down._] sylvia! don't you see mr. pringle?

sylvia.

[_turning and starting._] oh! what _have_ i said?

mrs. futvoye.

nothing, my dear. [_turning to pringle._] i must ask you to excuse me, mr.
pringle. my husband is a little irritable this morning. [_going up to
sliding-doors._] a sharp attack of--of gout. in both legs, you know! [_she
slips in behind the long sofa, pushes back doors, draws the curtains behind
them._] anthony, you must _not_ excite yourself like this.

[_she goes into study, closing the
sliding-doors after her. a slight
pause. sylvia pushes the sofa
back against the sliding-doors and
seats herself on it._

pringle.

[_approaching the sofa, with sympathy._] i really had no idea your father
was--was as bad as all _this_.

sylvia.

[_on her guard._] people _do_ kick, mr. pringle, when they have gout--in
both legs.

pringle.

_do_ they? i should hardly have thought--particularly--[_with meaning_]--if
they've gout in--all four.

sylvia.

[_shrinking back._] "all four!" then--you _know_!

pringle.

pardon me--but i couldn't help catching a glimpse just now--through these
doors.

sylvia.

a glimpse? what did you--_suppose_ you saw?

pringle.

i had an impression--of course i may be quite wrong!--that any one who
didn't _know_ your father might almost mistake him, at first sight, for--i
am trying to put it as delicately as i can--for some kind
of--er--_quadruped_.

[_he sits on sofa beside her._

sylvia.

you mean a _mule_! [_she rises in tears, and crosses to the mantelpiece._]
i think i could have borne it better if he'd only been a _nice_ mule.
b--but--[_breaking down_]--he _isn't_!

pringle.

[_rising and going towards her._] you don't say so! [_sympathetically._]
that, of course, must make it all the harder for you.

sylvia.

[_tearfully._] his temper is simply _fearful_! why, just now, when i said
he must try to manage some oats or a carrot for lunch, he--he lashed out
and sent his hoofs through the mummy-case!

pringle.

dear--dear! perhaps if you could persuade him to see a vet[_correcting
himself._] i mean a _doctor_

sylvia.

[_crossing towards sofa on right._] it would be no use--he never _will_
take medicine! and what are we to _do_ with him? it's too dreadful to think
that he may have to be sent to--to a home of rest for horses!

[_she sinks on sofa, and bursts
into tears once more._

pringle.

[_following her._] he never _was_ what you might call a "horsey" man--let
us hope he won't come to _that_! have you any idea how he came to
be--er--affected like this?

sylvia.

[_resentfully, through her tears._] there's no _affectation_ about it, mr.
pringle--oh, you mean "afflicted"--we can't _think_. he wasn't as bright as
usual at breakfast--i think he was rather worried because he couldn't find
that seal horace lent him last night

pringle.

but no amount of _worry_! pardon me, i interrupt you.

[_he takes a chair by the sofa._

sylvia.

well; then jessie came in to say that a foreign gentleman had called to see
him on important business. father told her to show him into the study, and
went in presently to hear what he came about. we heard them arguing, and
father's voice seemed to be getting angry, so mother went in to beg him
not to excite himself. she found father alone, and--just as she opened the
door--he--he changed into a mule before her eyes.

[_she breaks down entirely._

pringle.

really? it--it must have upset her considerably.

sylvia.

it _did_. but, luckily, mother never loses her head. she locked the study
doors at once, and we shut these, and i don't _think_ the servants suspect
anything at present. but they're sure to find out before long.

pringle.

yes. i'm afraid it's bound to leak out.

sylvia.

but how could this horrible thing have happened?

pringle.

[_solemnly._] my dear miss sylvia, let me remind you that "there are more
things in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in"

sylvia.

[_petulantly._] oh, don't quote that _now_, mr. pringle! it _is_ so stale!

pringle.

[_with wounded dignity._] it may be stale--but it's shakespeare! and i can
only conclude that--even in the twentieth century--magic is not the lost
art i had always imagined it.

sylvia.

[_turning to him with more interest._] then _you_ believe now that horace
_did_ find a jinnee in that brass bottle?

pringle.

[_rising._] no, no. i don't go as far as _that_.

sylvia.

how far _do_ you go?

pringle.

well, i know that ventimore is associated with an elderly oriental who
possesses extraordinary will-power. this very morning, in ventimore's own
office, they played a highly unprofessional and discreditable trick between
them on your own godfather, mr. wackerbath.

sylvia.

on godfather! no, no, i'm sure horace had nothing to do with _that_!

pringle.

i was _there_--and he evidently had a great _deal_ to do with it. i thought
at the time it was hypnotism--but it's clear enough _now_ that this
confederate of ventimore's is a powerful and most unscrupulous magician.

sylvia.

[_springing up indignantly, and crossing to fireplace._] i won't hear any
more! you're trying to make me doubt horace again--but you can't! you
_can't_! i _know_ he'd never send a magician to hurt father! [_as horace
enters from the hall, looking pale and wild._] ah! horace, you needn't
tell me! _you_ at least have no share in what has happened!

horace.

[_going to her and taking both her hands._] darling! for heaven's sake tell
me what _has_ happened?

sylvia.

[_triumphantly._] you hear, mr. pringle? he doesn't even know! _now_ will
you dare to repeat what you were saying--to his face?

pringle.

if you insist. i've been saying, ventimore, that i believe _you_ to have
inspired this abominable transformation of the professor.

horace.

it's true, then? he--he really _is_ a mule?

sylvia.

[_disengaging herself, with a sudden doubt._] horace, tell me--_did_ you
send any one to father!

horace.

[_sinking into chair by sofa._] heaven forgive me! i did.

sylvia.

[_recoiling from him with aversion._] to transform him into a mule?

[_she goes to a chair below
fireplace, and seats herself in
despair._

horace.

[_rising and going towards her._] no, no! i wanted old fakrash to convince
him that he really _had_ been in the bottle--but not like _this_! i thought
i could trust him to do _that_! [_bitterly._] but i might have known!

pringle.

so you still stick to that story about the jinnee?

horace.

surely even _you_ must believe it now?

pringle.

i--i admit that it doesn't seem so incredible as it did. but, if true,
there's all the less excuse for you. because you can make this jinnee, or
whatever he is, do anything you tell him. you can't deny that--i've seen
you _do_ it, you know!

sylvia.

ah!

horace.

i can manage him right enough when he's _there_--it's when i haven't got my
eye on him that he makes all these mistakes.

sylvia.

but _why_ should he change poor father into a one-eyed mule? it's so
utterly unreasonable!

horace.

i'm afraid the professor alarmed him by threatening to send for a
constable. however, darling--and this is what i'm here to tell you--it
won't last long. _i'll_ take care that your father will soon be restored.

sylvia.

[_rising, overjoyed._] you _will_? oh, i _must_ tell them! [_rushing to the
sliding-doors and slightly opening them._] mother, mother! i've
news--_good_ news!

mrs. futvoye.

[_looking cautiously through the opening._] what is it, sylvia? [_sees
horace with displeasure._] mr. ventimore! _you_ here! [_stamping heard
from study. mrs. futvoye turns and speaks over her shoulder._] keep
back, anthony! keep back! remember--you're not fit to be seen, as you
_are_!

sylvia.

[_happily._] it doesn't matter, mother. they _both_ know. and horace is
going to make father all right again.

mrs. futvoye.

oh, in _that_ case

[_she pushes the sofa aside and
comes through, leaving the
sliding-doors open, and pulling the
curtains back, but replacing the
sofa._

horace.

mrs. futvoye, i've something to say which i think will cheer the professor
up a bit.

mrs. futvoye.

unless you can say how and when my husband may expect to see an end of all
this

horace.

i shall make old fakrash see to that.

mrs. futvoye.

make old fakrash see to it?

horace.

the jinnee i let out of that brass bottle. i told you all about him last
night. you didn't believe me _then_.

pringle.

none of us did. but i'm afraid, mrs. futvoye, we've got to believe now.

mrs. futvoye.

[_to horace._] then--are _you_ responsible for this?

horace.

indirectly. only indirectly. i couldn't prevent fakrash making an ass of
himself.

mrs. futvoye.

you might have prevented his making a mule of my husband!

[_another plunge and crash of glass
from behind._

horace.

i wasn't consulted! but i will say _this_ for old fakrash--nobody's readier
to repair a blunder when once it's pointed out to him. he'll do anything
for _me_.

mrs. futvoye.

then send for him and _insist_ on his repairing what he's done here.

sylvia.

[_eagerly, down on right._] yes, yes. send for him, horace, _send_ for him!

horace.

[_heavily._] i'm afraid it wouldn't be any use.

pringle.

nonsense! you could make him come if you _chose_!

horace.

i tell you i can't. i don't even know where he is--or if he hasn't gone off
to arabia again

mrs. futvoye.

off to arabia! [_going towards him._] and when--_when_ is he likely to be
_back_?

horace.

[_suddenly._] oh! [_he collapses into the chair above the fireplace._]
i--i've only just remembered. he told me he was going to _settle down_
there!

[_general consternation._

mrs. futvoye.

and is my husband to remain a mule for the rest of his life?

[_furious plunging heard from
study._

horace.

[_in a choked voice._] don't ask me, mrs. futvoye--don't _ask_ me!

_pringle._

[_coming towards horace._] i _thought_, ventimore, you came to cheer the
professor up?

sylvia.

horace, if you don't summon that odious jinnee this instant, i shall _hate_
you! i'm _beginning_ to, as it is!

horace.

[_rising and coming towards her._] my darling, i'd do any mortal thing i
could--but i'm helpless! [_at this instant fakrash, in oriental robe and
turban, and a long green cloak, suddenly emerges from the cabinet between
the sliding-doors and the door to the hall, and stands scowling and
evidently trying to repress both rage and fear. horace sees him first._]
no, i'm not! hooray! we're saved! he's turned up, after all! [_the others
retreat towards the fireplace in alarm._] leave him to _me_. _i_ know how
to manage him. [_he approaches fakrash._] so here you are! if you aren't
ashamed of yourself, you jolly well _ought_ to be! a pretty mess you've
landed us in this time! just you get us _out_ of it again!

fakrash.

[_waving him aside._] no greeting to thee! i have come upon my own
affairs.

horace.

you'll attend to _mine_ first. undo this infamous spell of yours--do you
hear?

fakrash.

[_sullenly._] i will grant nothing more at _thy_ request.

horace.

i don't think you quite understand. i don't _request_--i _command_. on the
head and on the eye!

fakrash.

thou art wasting breath. no longer am i under obligation to thee, o thou
perfidious one!

horace.

[_anxiously._] why--what's _come_ to you? [_coaxingly._] i say!
fakrash--old _chappie_. don't play the goat _now_! you _can't_ mean to
leave me on the mat like this!

fakrash.

[_glaring at him._] canst thou not perceive how hateful thou hast become to
me?

horace.

i _do_ notice a coolness. but _why_? you were chummy enough not half an
hour ago!

fakrash.

[_going from him towards right._] i had not then discovered thy treachery.

horace.

you're barking up the wrong tree, as usual, you know. come--tell me what
it's all about?

fakrash.

not now. i will deal with thee hereafter, misbegotten cur that thou art!

[_he stalks towards window._

mrs. futvoye.

[_from below fireplace, to horace._] you don't seem to be managing him very
well _so_ far.

pringle.

[_coming down to horace._] you gave us to understand that he would do
_anything_ for you.

horace.

so he will, generally--but not just now. [_crossing to mrs. futvoye and
sylvia, while fakrash remains apart, with his back to the others._] he's
suddenly turned nasty--i've no idea why. but i shall bring him round--in
time.

mrs. futvoye.

it's my _husband_ who has to be brought round--and there's no time to be
lost!

horace.

i know--but if i press fakrash in his present mood, i shall only make
matters worse.

pringle.

well, if you can't--or _won't_--get him to do something, one of _us_ must
try! perhaps if miss sylvia could bring herself to appeal to his better
feelings?

sylvia.

[_shrinking back._] people who come out of bottles can't _have_ better
feelings! i couldn't--_really_, i couldn't.

pringle.

you'd rather not? [_sylvia shudders._] then i must see what _i_ can do.

mrs. futvoye.

how _good_ of you!

horace.

[_drawing pringle back as he is going towards fakrash._] i _wouldn't_,
pringle! he's in a vile temper. and, unless you're _anxious_ to become a
domestic animal of some sort

sylvia.

_pray_ don't run such a risk, dear mr. pringle!

pringle.

i shall be very careful, and i trust that, with ordinary tact[_he
makes a step towards fakrash._] ahem! [_fakrash turns suddenly round with a
feline snarl; all retreat to left; pringle pulls himself together and
tries again._] my--my dear sir, may i ask your attention for a few moments?

fakrash.

[_striding towards him._] who art _thou_?--a friend of yonder serpent's?

horace.

[_indignantly._] oh, i say! "serpent," you know! "serpent" is a bit

[_fakrash ignores him._

pringle.

no, no, i repudiate him. i represent this unfortunate family--_they_
repudiate him too.

mrs. futvoye and sylvia.

[_together._] yes, yes, indeed--_indeed_ we do!

[_horace sinks speechlessly on
chair by sofa on right._

fakrash.

[_to pringle._] i will hearken unto thee, for indeed thou seemest a person
of abundant intelligence and excellent conduct.

pringle.

you're very kind--i hope i _am_. hem! [_going nearer fakrash._] i am sure,
sir, that, if you had realised the serious embarrassment you have caused
the members of this household by transforming its head into a one-eyed
mule, you would never have allowed your--your sense of humour to carry you
so far.

fakrash.

for mine own safety was it accomplished--for the sage threatened to deliver
me into custody.

horace.

[_starting up and coming towards fakrash._] he never _meant_ it! and,
anyhow, _you're_ safe enough!

fakrash.

[_turning on him fiercely._] hold thy lying tongue!

pringle.

ventimore, i must beg you not to interfere.

horace.

damn it all, pringle, he's _my_ jinnee--not yours!

[_he attempts to join mrs. futvoye
and sylvia, who turn their backs
on him, after which he returns to
his former place, crushed._

pringle.

[_to fakrash._] evidently, sir, there has been some slight misunderstanding
on both sides. but i feel confident that, if you will only consent to see
this unfortunate gentleman, the matter can very soon be amicably arranged.

fakrash.

i am here for this very purpose. let this learned man appear before me.

pringle.

i won't keep you waiting long. [_he goes up to the sliding-doors and
calls._] professor! if you will kindly step this way, mr. fakrash would be
glad to see you.

[_a pause. the mule comes slowly
on from the left side of the
sliding doors._

horace.

[_overwhelmed._] great heavens above!

pringle.

[_trying to be polite and at his ease._] er--how do you do, professor?
sorry to see you looking so--so unlike yourself. [_the mule shows
irritation; pringle retreats nervously; then, in an undertone to mrs.
futvoye._] he--he can't jump that sofa, can he?

mrs. futvoye.

[_in an undertone, to him._] of course not--that's why it's there!

pringle.

[_to fakrash._] a distinguished archæologist, sir, a corresponding member
of every learned society in europe--reduced to these extremities! [_to
the mule, which seems to feel its position acutely._] professor, as
ventimore has refused to interfere, i have taken on myself to assure
this--this venerable jane

horace.

[_in an undertone to pringle._] _jinnee!_ call him "jinnee"!

pringle.

[_to horace._] i prefer to leave such familiarities to _you_,
ventimore[_to mule._]--this venerable _personage_, professor, that if
you have inadvertently offended him, you are ready to make any reasonable
apology. that is so?

[_the mule bows its head._

fakrash.

ask if he be willing to surrender the stopper of the bottle wherein i was
enclosed.

[_mule shakes head._

pringle.

now, professor, if you consent to a request which i must say seems to me a
very moderate and proper one, will you--er--signify the same in the usual
manner by raising--er--your right ear?

[_the mule's left ear goes up
sharply._

fakrash.

the _left_ ear! he refuseth!

pringle.

no, no, he _meant_ the right ear--he hasn't got complete muscular control
as yet. i _really_ think we should get on better if you gave him back his
power of speech.

fakrash.

it may be so. [_he approaches the mule and addresses it._] o thou of
remarkable attainments, whom i have caused to assume the shape of this
mule, speak, i command thee, and say if thou wilt restore my stopper.

the mule.

[_laying back its ears and showing its teeth._] i'll see you damned first!

[_general sensation._

mrs. futvoye.

[_going towards the mule in distress._] oh! he wouldn't be so obstinate
if he wasn't a mule!

fakrash.

[_to the mule._] thou art trifling with my safety and thine own! reveal
unto me the spot in which thou hast hidden the stopper and delay not--for
it will be no difficult undertaking to transform these women of thine into
mules like thyself.

[_horror of mrs. futvoye and
sylvia, _and despair and rage of
horace, who rises and rushes
towards fakrash.

the mule.

you can _do_ it for all _i_ care!

mrs. futvoye.

oh, anthony!

the mule.

we shall at least be a more united family than we are now!

mrs. futvoye.

[_frantically._] anthony! don't provoke him! think of _others_!

fakrash.

[_with some anxiety._] hearken! i am disposed to show thee indulgence.
obey,--and i will restore thee to what thou wert.

the mule.

why couldn't you say so before? i'll accept _those_ terms, as there's no
alternative. only--[_with his head on one side reflectively_]--i can't for
the life of me recollect what i _did_ with that seal. tut-tut!

mrs. futvoye.

oh, anthony! think! think!

[_general suspense and excitement._

the mule.

[_irritably._] i _am_ thinking, sophia! [_after further reflection._] ah! i
remember now! i put it inside one of the vases on the mantelpiece, for
safety.

[horace looks aimlessly under the
table and sofa; mrs. futvoye,
sylvia, and pringle rush to the
fireplace and search the vases._

mrs. futvoye and sylvia.

[_turning vases upside down._] which? which? no. it's not _there_! it's not
_here._

pringle.

[_as he finds the metal cap in the last vase._] i've got it! [_going to
fakrash, and presenting it._] allow me, sir.

[_fakrash snatches it eagerly.
pringle goes up to the mule and
reassures it, mrs. futvoye
accompanying him._

fakrash.

[_gloating over the cap._] it is indeed my stopper! now shall i be secure
from disturbance!

horace.

[_going to fakrash, seizing his arm, and drawing him to the right; then,
in an undertone._] pitch into me afterwards if you like--but listen now.
you _must_ keep _your_ side of the bargain!

fakrash.

[_coldly._] what _i_ have promised i perform.

horace.

[_relieved._] ah, i _knew_ you were a good old sort--at bottom. and--i
say--_do_ make them understand that _i've_ had nothing to do with all
this.

fakrash.

[_grimly._] have no uneasiness--for thou shalt receive justice. [_horace
retires to sofa on right, expecting to be rehabilitated._] hear, o
company, my words! i repent of my conduct in obeying the orders of yonder
wretch--[_pointing to horace, who gasps in stupefaction_]--who is seeking
even now to deter me from showing kindness.

horace.

liar! _liar!_

fakrash.

being desirous of escaping marriage with this damsel--[_with a step
towards sylvia_]--he commanded me to transform her father as ye see. and i,
whom he had delivered from a bottle of brass, was compelled by gratitude to
fulfil all his desires.

horace.

[_going up to fakrash furiously._] you infernal old scoundrel! [_fakrash
smiles malignantly and stalks off to the right; horace crosses to
sylvia._] _you_ don't believe him, sylvia? you _can't_!

sylvia.

don't speak to me! don't come near me!

[_mrs. futvoye and pringle
express disgust and indignation._

horace.

you're devilish _hard_ on me, all of you. [_he staggers to the sofa in
front of sliding-doors and falls back, hitting his head against the mule's
nose; the mule makes a grab at him; he rises in confusion._] i--i beg
your pardon, sir!

[_he retreats to the left of the
sofa._

sylvia.

[_down on left, to fakrash._] but you won't obey him any longer, _will_
you? you _are_ going to restore poor father?

fakrash.

[_on the right._] let him first swear that he and all his household will
preserve secrecy concerning this affair.

the mule.

[_angrily._] damn it, sir, we're not likely to _chatter_ about it!

pringle.

[_approaching fakrash, reassuringly._] it will never be allowed to go
beyond the family.

fakrash.

[_to pringle._] o eloquent and comely-faced one, i accept thy undertaking,
for thou art indeed a worthy and honourable person. [_as pringle, highly
flattered, returns to the mule, fakrash beckons mrs. futvoye._] in order
that i may restore thy husband, bring me hither a cup of fair water.

mrs. futvoye.

there's some in the dining-room. [_going towards door to hall._] at least,
it's _filtered_, if _that_ will do!

the mule.

don't ask foolish questions, sophia--do as you're _told_!

mrs. futvoye.

[_with dignity._] i think you forget yourself, anthony!

[_pringle opens the door for her,
and she goes out._

sylvia.

[_going to pringle, and taking his hand._] dear, _dear_ mr. pringle!
where _should_ we be without _you_?

pringle.

[_modestly._] don't _mention_ it, miss sylvia! that is--no trouble, i
assure you!

[_they come down together to the
left, talking in dumb show._

horace.

[_going to fakrash on the right._] you--you pig-headed old
muddler--[_pointing to sylvia and pringle_]--look at _that_! you've done
for me _this_ time.

fakrash.

[_darkly._] nay--not yet.

[_mrs. futvoye enters from the
hall, carrying a glass goblet full
of water._

mrs. futvoye.

[_to fakrash._] i've brought it in this, but if you _prefer_ a
breakfast-cup

the mule.

[_impatiently._] what the devil does it matter? let him get _on_ with it!

fakrash.

[_as he meets mrs. futvoye and takes the goblet from her._] this will
serve. [_he goes up to the mule and sprinkles some drops of water on its
head._] quit this form and return unto the form in which thou wert!

[_the mule fades into the
professor, who appears gasping and
in an extremely bad temper;
pringle shifts the sofa to let him
pass; fakrash retires to near the
window._

sylvia.

[_rushing to the professor._] father!

mrs. futvoye.

[_coming to his other side._] now, anthony, after all you have been
through, you'd better sit down for a little.

sylvia.

[_as she and mrs. futvoye bring him down to the chair left of sofa on
right._] it _is_ lovely to have you back, father dear!

pringle.

[_joining them._] you're looking better _already_, sir!

professor futvoye.

[_sinking into the chair by sofa._] tut-tut! there, there--nothing to make
all this fuss about! if one of you had only had the sense to try cold
water, i should have come round _long_ before this!

sylvia.

but, father!--you forget that, but for mr. pringle

professor futvoye.

no, my dear, i do _not_. i owe much--very much--to pringle's good
offices--as i shall remember, my dear pringle, as i shall _remember_. but i
attribute my restoration in some measure to the fact that--from first to
last--i was able to preserve perfect calm and self-control.

pringle.

[_with an involuntary glance at the study, in which every article of
furniture is smashed._] quite _so_! and now i want you--all three--to
celebrate your recovery by dining with me this evening at the savoy. you
promised you would last night, professor. not in the restaurant--i'll
engage a private room.

professor futvoye.

no, no--not to-night, my boy. i don't feel up to going out just yet.

mrs. futvoye.

nonsense, anthony! you can dine out anywhere _now_, you know--and it will
do you good. thank you, mr. pringle, we shall be delighted. sha'n't we,
sylvia?

sylvia.

i think i would rather stay at home this evening, mother.

[_pringle tries to persuade her in
by-play._

professor futvoye.

[_rising._] we'll come, pringle, we'll come. [_to fakrash, who is still
standing by the window._] now then, sir, you've got all you came for--what
are you waiting for?

fakrash.

to receive thy thanks.

professor futvoye.

_what?_ for exposing me to all this humiliation! you'll get no thanks from
_me_, sir--and the sooner you and your accomplice relieve this house of
your presence the better!

fakrash.

[_moving to right behind the sofa._] let the rat, while he is still between
the leopard's paws, observe rigidly all the laws of politeness! take
heed--or thou mayst become more hideous even than a mule!

[_general sensation._

professor futvoye.

eh? i spoke hastily--but i meant nothing offensive! i--i'm very much
obliged to you. and now don't let us detain you--_either_ of you--from your
other engagements.

horace.

[_coming forward._] i'm going, sir--but i must say one last word to
sylvia!

fakrash.

[_to sylvia._] hearken not to this deceiver, o damsel,--for he will never
wed thee!

sylvia.

[_indignantly._] i'll never wed _him_!

fakrash.

thou wilt not--for he is betrothed to a darker bride.

horace.

what!

sylvia.

ah! [_to horace, coldly._] the--the lady i met last night? i wish you
every happiness. [_turning to pringle._] on second thoughts, mr. pringle, i
_will_ come to dinner to-night.

[_pringle expresses his
gratification._

horace.

[_going nearer sylvia._] sylvia! it may be for the last time!

fakrash.

it is! come! [_he extends his right hand towards horace, who is
irresistibly drawn backwards to him._] for i will tarry no longer.

[_he seizes his arm._

horace.

[_making an ineffectual resistance._] let me go, fakrash! where are you
taking me to?

fakrash.

[_seizes him round the waist._] to meet--[_he soars up with horace
through the open window on the right, and the remainder of the sentence is
continued outside in mid-air_]--thy bride!

[_the others go to window and gaze
after them, pointing upwards._

pringle.

[_with solemn disapproval._] disgraceful! they've flown right over the
chimney-pots!

the curtain falls.

end of the third act.

the fourth act

scene i

horace's rooms, as in the opening of the play_.

_the time is immediately after the close of the third act._

_as the curtain rises mrs. rapkin
_is arranging various articles on
the table_. rapkin enters from the
door leading to landing, carrying a
pair of boots on trees, which he
takes into horace's bedroom by
the door down on the right, and
then returns._

rapkin.

[_uneasily, to mrs. rapkin._] marire, did mr. ventimore _say_ anythink this
morning--regarding last night?

mrs. rapkin.

ah, you may well ask! after sneakin' off first thing like you did, and
leavin' me to make your excuses!

rapkin.

you'd some to make on your own, marire. [_sitting on right of table._] if
his friends got any dinner, it was no thanks to _you_!

mrs. rapkin.

i'd never have gone if i 'adn't fancied the 'ouse was changed into arabian
'alls and full o' grinnin' niggers!

rapkin.

_fancied!_ why, _i_ see 'em same as you did, didn't i?

mrs. rapkin.

you! you'd ha' seen anythink in the condition _you_ was in! and, any'ow,
the 'ouse was just as usual when we come in.

rapkin.

it _was_--and that on'y made it all the rummier! for you can't deny as
there was _somethink_ queer goin' on 'ere.

mrs. rapkin.

[_severely._] there was _you_, william! and you'll go on from bad to worse
if you don't give up nippin'!

[_she goes up to bookcase on the
left._

rapkin.

oh, come _orf_ it, marire! you tole me yourself you see a percession of
camels stop at our door long before _i_ got 'ome!

mrs. rapkin.

and i did--if it was my last words. camuels and furrin' parties as brought
in packages off of them. luckily, they was all gone afore the neighbours
'ad time to take notice. [_coming down to table._] and the best thing you
and me can do is to let bygones _be_ bygones, and 'old our tongues about
it.

rapkin.

all very fine--but 'ow do we know mr. ventimore mayn't be up to _more_ of
these 'ere games?

mrs. rapkin.

mr. ventimore! i _did_ blame him--at first. but i'm sure now as _'e_ 'ad
nothink to do with it. poor dear young gentleman, we've never known 'im
beyave otherwise than _as_ a gentleman, and[_there is a sound outside
of rushing wind, as fakrash swoops down with horace and both alight on
the balcony; mrs. rapkin turns, screams, and sinks into a chair on the
right of the fireplace._] bless us and save us! oh, mr. ventimore!
[_seeing fakrash._] and who's _that_?

horace.

[_disengaging himself from fakrash, and stepping in._] that will do, mrs.
rapkin. can't i bring a--a friend in with me without your making all this
fuss about it?

mrs. rapkin.

[_rising, with dignity._] when you and your friends come flyin' in at
first-floor windows like pidgins, mr. ventimore, you must expect _some_
notice to be took. [_rapkin makes a movement to the left as though
fascinated by fakrash, who stands impassively by the window._] it's
giving my 'ouse a bad name, and, as i've always kep' these apartments
respectable 'itherto, you'll be good enough to find others where they're
less partickler, for put up with it i won't!

horace.

all right, all right! you can go now--[_touching rapkin, who seems
spellbound with fear of fakrash_]--_both_ of you. i've some business to
settle with this--gentleman.

mrs. rapkin.

[_at door._] i'm going.

rapkin.

[_as he follows, still keeping his eyes on fakrash._] 'e's done it,
marire--sold 'isself, _'e_ 'as! ah! [_as he goes out with mrs. rapkin._] i
wouldn't be in _his_ shoes for somethink!

[_the moment they have gone horace
rushes to the door, opens it to
make sure that they are not
listening outside, then locks it,
and comes down to fakrash in a
white rage._

horace.

now then, you--you unspeakable old swine! what do you _mean_ by bringing me
here like this?

fakrash.

[_crossing to the right._] verily i was tempted to drop thee in mid-air,
forgetting my purpose.

horace.

to introduce me to that precious bride of yours, eh? i've told you already
i'll have nothing to do with her.

fakrash.

thou canst not escape _this_ bride--[_he suddenly produces a huge scimitar
and brandishes it_]--for her name is--death!

horace.

death! i say, you don't mean that! [_as fakrash advances on him with a
sweep of the scimitar, which horace ducks to avoid._] yes, you do!
[_backing below window._] by gad! you're _dangerous_! well, just tell me
_this_--what on earth have i done to deserve death?

fakrash.

i have brought thee hither--not to parley with thee, but to strike off thy
head in the very place of thy perjuries.

horace.

[_trying to keep cool._] i see. you seem to have forgotten that this is the
very place where i let you out of that bottle.

fakrash.

[_wrathfully._] far better were it hadst thou suffered me to remain
therein!

horace.

i quite agree with you _there_. [_as fakrash makes another cut at him
with the scimitar._] now, before you begin this execution, you'd better
listen to me. you've got hold of some quite imaginary grievance, and i can
tell you you'll look uncommonly foolish if you find after you've cut off my
head that there's nothing _in_ it--[_correcting himself, annoyed_]--in the
_grievance_, i mean!

fakrash.

o thou of plausible tongue, know that i have discovered thy treachery and
deceit! didst thou not assure me that i was free to wander where i would,
since there was no longer any that had authority over the jinn!

horace.

i don't _know_ of anybody that has. [_half to himself._] wish to heaven i
did!

fakrash.

[_with raised scimitar._] thou hast lied--for there _is_ such a potentate!
since i visited thee this morn i have traversed many lands--and in _all_
have i seen the signs of his dominion and his wrath against us of the jinn!

horace.

[_blankly._] i've no _idea_ what you're driving at.

fakrash.

again thou liest! [_as he is about to raise scimitar again horace keeps
fakrash's right arm down._] from this very spot whereon we stand thou
canst behold such signs. [_pointing with left hand through the open
windows._] tell me, what are yonder strongholds of blackened brick?

horace.

[_mystified._] those? oh, factories--works of sorts.

fakrash.

[_pointing with scimitar._] and yonder strange and gigantic cylinders red
as blood?

horace.

[_pushing fakrash's hand away._] gasometers.

fakrash.

call them what thou wilt--they are prison-houses! all, all dungeons wherein
my wretched brethren labour in torment till the day of doom! [_pacing
towards the right._] and every city throughout the world is filled with
such abominations! therefore--[_turning on him again_]--before i slay thee,
i demand that thou tell me the name of the potentate by whom these
punishments are imposed.

horace.

[_whose expression during the above speech shows that a way out is
beginning to suggest itself; to himself._] if i can--if only i _can_! [_as
fakrash again waves the scimitar._] all right! i'll try to tell you. [_he
seats himself on the edge of the table._] the--er--potentate has several
names, but his most popular title is progress.

fakrash.

[_salaaming._] on whom be peace!

horace.

by all means! well, progress has subdued the--er--unruly forces of nature,
and compelled them to labour for humanity.

fakrash.

then why didst thou conceal from me that i, too, am in danger of being
seized and condemned to toil?

horace.

why? because i thought you were such a respectable, harmless old foozle
that you'd never do anything to deserve it. [_watching him._] but, of
course, you _will_ if you cut my head off. you'll have a much worse time
than ever you had in the bottle!

fakrash.

i know it. for no other reason have i recovered my stopper but to return
into my bottle once more.

horace.

[_relieved._] i think you're wise. [_getting down from the table._] and i
tell you what--if you'll only make it worth my while i'll seal you up
myself.

fakrash.

o thou of imperfect understanding! ere i re-enter my bottle thy head will
already have been smitten from thy shoulders. [_pointing scimitar across
table at horace._] how, then, couldst thou?

horace.

[_wincing._] you needn't go on--i quite see your point. only--if _i_ don't
seal you up, who _will_?

fakrash.

[_confidently._] i shall summon my efreets to enclose me within the bottle
and transport it to the sea of el-karkar, where i shall be undisturbed.

horace.

[_slightly dashed for the moment._] oh! is _that_ the idea? [_catching at a
straw._] but _efreets_, eh? [_watching him keenly._] are you quite sure you
can _trust_ 'em? you know what efreets _are_! [_with triumph, as fakrash
plucks at his beard uneasily._] ah! i _thought_ you did!

fakrash.

thinkest thou that they might betray me?

horace.

they'd _love_ it! and as soon as they got you safely corked up, what's to
prevent them from handing you over to progress? progress won't put up with
_your_ little ways--you can't go about beheading architects in _this_
country without paying for your fun. i expect you'd catch it devilish hot!

fakrash.

[_falling on his knees in sudden terror._] repentance, o progress! i will
not return to the like conduct ever! [_he rises trembling._] willingly will
i depart from the world as it now is--for it hath ceased to be a
pleasure-garden and become a place of desolation and horror!

horace.

[_calmly._] quite so; and i can help you to return from it. _i'm_ not an
efreet, and if _i_ undertake to bottle you up and drop you into a deep part
of our river here, you can depend on me to _do_ it.

fakrash.

undertake this, and in return i will grant thee thy life.

horace.

[_disguising his satisfaction._] not good enough! you must offer better
terms than _that_! what have _you_ done to deserve any help from me?

fakrash.

have i not loaded thee with kindnesses?

horace.

kindnesses! till i met you i was happy and hopeful--now, i'm miserable and
desperate!

fakrash.

is not life itself a sufficient boon?

horace.

what? when you've parted me for ever from the girl i love! life is no boon
to me _now_. if _you_ don't put an end to me i shall do it myself--by
jumping over that balcony and breaking my neck!... i've a good mind to do
it now.

[_he makes a sudden movement
towards the balcony as though to
carry out his threat._

fakrash.

[_detaining him._] hold! i entreat thee! do not abandon me thus, and all
that i have done i will undo!

[_as he speaks he throws away the
scimitar, which, to horace's
amazement, vanishes._

horace.

[_going to the right with his back to the audience._] that's more like
_business_! but--_can_ you undo the mischief you've done?

fakrash.

with the greatest ease that can be! [_he stalks towards the window, extends
his right arm, and mutters some cryptic sentence, then turns complacently
to horace._] i have obliterated from the minds of thy betrothed and her
parents all memory of myself and the brass bottle, and of every incident
connected therewith.

horace.

by jove! that's rather a neat way out--[_with sudden doubt_]--if you've
really _done_ all that!

fakrash.

may i be thy ransom if it be not accomplished!

horace.

well,--i must take your word for it. but there's mr. and mrs.
wackerbath,--can you make _them_ forget everything connected with
you--except that i'm to build them a house?

fakrash.

[_going to the window and repeating the incantation, then returning to the
centre of the room._] all else hath utterly passed from their recollection.

horace.

splendid! do the thing well while you're about it--better throw in their
coachman--oh, and the couple you saw here just now,--the rapkins.

fakrash.

[_repeats the incantation, facing the door._] it is done. they remember
naught of that they have seen. and now ask no more of me, but perform thy
part and bring hither my bottle.

horace.

[_going to door down on the right._] right! i'll go and get it out of my
bedroom.

[_he goes out._

fakrash.

[_pacing up and down in suspense and terror._] haste! haste! for until i am
in my bottle once more every instant is an eternity!

horace.

[_returning with the bottle, which he sets down on the floor in front of
the mantelpiece._] here's your bottle! got the stopper?

fakrash.

[_after some fumbling in his robes, finds the metal cap and gives it to
horace._] it is here. now swear to me by the beard of progress that thou
wilt drop me into deep waters, even as thou hast promised!

horace.

i swear it--by the beard of progress--on whom be peace!... you step in,
sir, and leave the rest to me.

fakrash.

[_as he raises his arms and moves towards the fireplace._] to escape into a
bottle is pleasant!

horace.

delightful!

fakrash.

[_who is now behind the bottle, with his arms extended in supplication and
his back to the audience._] towbah yah nebbi ullah anna lah amill kathalik
ibadan! wullah hi!

[_with the last words he disappears
through the neck of the bottle._

horace.

[_standing by the bottle with the cap._] tucked yourself in comfortably?
say _when_.

[_there is a knock at the door
leading to landing._

fakrash's voice.

[_from interior of bottle._] i am betrayed! the constables of progress are
without! let me forth that i may slay them and secure safety!

horace.

[_promptly clapping on the cap and screwing it tightly._] you're safer
where you _are_, old cocky! good-bye! [_wipes his forehead._] phew! near
thing that! [_the knock is repeated._] all right! wait a bit! i'm busy!

[_he takes the bottle into his
bedroom._

rapkin's voice.

[_outside door._] all right, sir! [_horace returns, goes to door at back,
and unlocks it; to rapkin, who is seen with a telegram._] what is it?

rapkin.

[_entering._] reply telegram, sir. [_handing it to horace._] boy's waiting.

horace.

[_reading the telegram._] "can you dine with wife and self, savoy hotel,
8.15 to-night? quite small party. could discuss plans new house. ask for
'pinafore' room.--wackerbath." good! _wackerbath's_ all right, anyhow! [_he
pulls a chair to the table and sits down to fill up the reply form. as he
does so his face suddenly clouds._] the _savoy_, though! pringle's dining
there to-night.... good lord! _i forgot all about pringle!_ i wonder if
fakrash has made _him_ forget? if he _didn't_, by george! there'll be a
pretty kettle of fish!

rapkin.

[_thinking he is being addressed._] beg pardon, sir?

horace.

nothing--i wasn't speaking to _you_. [_finishes writing the form and hands
it to rapkin._] can you read it?

rapkin.

[_reading._] "delighted. savoy, 8.15 to-night.--ventimore." excuse me, sir,
but _when_ is it you're expecting friends to dinner 'ere?

horace.

[_at a loss for the moment._] er--_when_? i--i'm not sure. [_as he crosses
to his bedroom._] oh, just tell mrs. rapkin i should like to see her.

[_he goes into bedroom._

rapkin.

[_looking round, as mrs. rapkin enters from landing._] mr. ventimore was
just _asking_ for you, marire.

mrs. rapkin.

[_surprised._] was he? i didn't know he'd come in.

[_she crosses to the bookcase,
places a newspaper on the shelf on
left of fireplace, then goes to the
windows and closes them._

rapkin.

nor yet me--but he 'ave.

[_he goes out, leaving door open._

horace.

[_coming from bedroom, carrying a bulky and apparently heavy kit-bag._] i
only wanted to tell you that i sha'n't be in to dinner to-night, mrs.
rapkin.

[_he sets the bag down on the
table._

mrs. rapkin.

goin' out of town, sir?

horace.

no. why? [_mrs. rapkin indicates the bag._] oh, this kit-bag? i'm lending
it--to a friend of mine. just going to see him off--[_taking up the bag
again and going to the door_]--for a long holiday. i shall come in to
dress. [_to himself._] fool i was to forget pringle!

[_as horace goes out the stage is
in darkness for an interval of a
minute or two, after which the
curtain rises on the last scene._

scene ii

_the "pinafore" private room at the
savoy hotel._

_at the back is a wide arch, beyond
which is a glazed balcony, with a
view over the tops of the
embankment trees of the river and
the surrey bank, with the shot
towers, &c., and the ends of
waterloo bridge on the extreme
left, and of charing cross railway
bridge on the extreme right._

_at the rising of the curtain this
view is seen in a warm sunset
glow._

_above the arch there is a door on
the right, leading to the corridor
and restaurant; another on the
left, by which the waiters come in
and go out._

_below the arch, down on the right,
is a fireplace; above the
fireplace, at right angles to it, a
couch, and behind the couch a long
flower-stand filled with flowers
and palms._

_up the stage, centre, is a round
table, laid for six persons, and
elaborately decorated with pink
gloire de france roses, under
rose-shaded lamp. six chairs are
placed round it, and a seventh
chair is in the glazed balcony._

_below the arch, on the left, is
another door, and down on left, at
a slight angle, a sofa, with
occasional tables and chairs.
against the wall on left is a
glazed cabinet._

_the furniture and decorations are
copied from the original room in
the savoy hotel._

_as the curtain rises the second
waiter is placing the napkins
under the supervision of the first
waiter. _waltz music is heard from
the restaurant on the right._

pringle's voice.

[_outside door above arch, to unseen attendant._] "entrance from the
embankment as well," eh? well, why didn't you _tell_ me that? my friends
have probably come in _that_ way while i was waiting at the _other_ end!
this is the "pinafore" room, isn't it? very _well_, then--i expect i shall
find them in here. [_he enters, and looks round the room._] no. they don't
seem to have arrived yet.

first waiter.

[_by the table._] not yet. they vill be here soon.

[_the second waiter goes out._

pringle.

eh? well, i _hope_ so, i'm sure. they're behind their time as it is.
[_inspecting table._] h'm! not bad. but you needn't have had all those
roses--half a dozen would have been _quite_ sufficient. and--hang it all!
you've laid for _six_ people!

first waiter.

pardon, m'sieu--we receive orders to lay for six person.

pringle.

nonsense! your orders were to lay for _four_. a "petty party carry"--if you
know what _that_ means.

first waiter.

parfaitement--but i think perhaps there is some mistake. this is the
"pinafore" room.

pringle.

i know _that_--and the manager told me this morning on the telephone that
he's reserved the "pinafore" room for _me_. i'm only expecting _three_
guests, though; so just clear away those two extra places, and look sharp
about it.

[_the second waiter returns._

first waiter.

but excuse--the manager he say to me

pringle.

confound you, do you suppose _i_ don't know how many people i've asked?
have the table altered at once, or i shall send for the manager.

first waiter.

[_with a shrug._] bien, m'sieu! you tell me there is a mistake--that is
enoff--i alter it.

[_he gives orders in an undertone
to the second waiter, who removes
two of the chairs to the balcony,
and takes off the corresponding
plates, glasses, &c._

pringle.

[_as he comes down to the left._] i sha'n't _pay_ for more than four--mind
that! [_to himself, as he sits on the couch down left._] it's going to cost
me quite enough without that, _i_ can see! [_the westminster clock-tower is
heard striking the quarter; pringle takes out his watch._] eight-fifteen!
and i asked them for eight sharp. very singular--the professor's generally
so punctual! [_he rises eagerly as the door on right above arch opens._]
ah, _here_ they are! [_horace enters and comes down; pringle draws
himself up stiffly._] what, _you_, ventimore! i scarcely expected to see
you here to-night.

[_the two waiters go out; the
waltz music stops._

horace.

[_coming down to couch by fireplace._] didn't you? i rather thought i might
run across _you_, somehow.

pringle.

[_austerely._] considering that, when i _last_ saw you, you were flying
over the chimney-pots with an oriental enchanter you had released from a
brass bottle

horace.

[_seating himself on sofa by fireplace._] ah! so you _haven't_ forgotten!

pringle.

it's hardly a thing one would be _likely_ to forget in a hurry. you were
being conducted to meet your bride, i think--are you beginning your
honeymoon in this hotel?

horace.

if you want to know, i'm here because i'm dining with the wackerbaths.

pringle.

what!--the client i met in your office this morning? then he must have an
uncommonly short memory, that's all! but, whether you're dining with him or
not, that's no reason why you should have forced your way in _here_! i
suppose you're hoping that, if you can only see miss futvoye

horace.

you're wrong, pringle, quite wrong. i don't in the least expect to see miss
futvoye here to-night. and i very much doubt if _you_ will, either.

pringle.

_do_ you? you wouldn't if you'd heard her parting words to me this
afternoon. i said to her: "you won't forget?" her answer was: "as if i
_could_--after all you've done for us!"

horace.

it--it's just possible that _all_ of them may have forgotten an engagement
which was made under--rather peculiar circumstances.

pringle.

that's just why they're not likely to forget it. [_going to fireplace, and
standing with his back to it._] they may be here at any moment!

horace.

they _may_--but, if i were you, i shouldn't count on them.

pringle.

i _do_ count on them--and i consider your intrusion here in the worst
possible taste. i think you might have the decency to go!

horace.

[_rising._] i tell you i'm here because this is the room which wackerbath
asked me to come to.

pringle.

it won't _do_, you know! if it was, he'd be here to receive you--which he
isn't.

[_as he speaks mr. wackerbath
bustles in from the door below the
arch on the left. horace goes
forward to meet him, pringle
remaining by the fireplace in
wrathful astonishment._

mr. wackerbath.

[_shaking hands effusively with horace._] my _dear_ mr. ventimore, i really
don't know _how_ to apologise, neither the wife nor myself down to receive
you! i do hope you haven't been waiting long?

horace.

only just come, i assure you.

mr. wackerbath.

we have a private room, you see--the wife prefers it to the--ah--publicity
of the restaurant. [_the first and second waiters enter from the door
on the left above the arch._] if you'll excuse me for a moment, i'll just
see how they've arranged the table. [_he bustles up to the table._] why,
hullo! what's _this_? only four places! i ordered dinner for _six_!

first waiter.

i regret--but it is not my fault. i lay for six, and a gentleman assure me
i am wrong, it is for four person only.

mr. wackerbath.

don't _talk_ about it--put it right at once. i want a chair in here--and
another here.

[_he remains by the table, while
the waiters replace chairs and
bring back plates, glasses, &c._

pringle.

[_to horace._] ventimore! [_horace crosses to fireplace._] will you kindly
explain to your host that that's _my_ dinner-table he's taking these
liberties with?

horace.

i know nothing about it. you had better settle that with him yourself.

pringle.

i intend to--presently.

[_he stands, nursing his grievance,
as mr. wackerbath comes down to
horace._

mr. wackerbath.

[_to horace._] those fellows seem to have mistaken their orders. lucky i
noticed it in time! [_mrs. wackerbath enters from the door below arch._]
ah, here _is_ my wife! eliza, my dear--[_presenting horace_]--our friend,
mr. ventimore.

mrs. wackerbath.

[_to horace, cordially, but with a nervous, fluttered manner._] oh, how
do you _do_? i _am_ so pleased to meet you! i've been hearing so _much_
about you from my husband. [_she goes to sofa on the left, and sits._] it
will be _so_ delightful to have a home at last that is _really_ fit to live
in!

[_pringle, hearing this, makes a
contemptuous ejaculation to
himself._

mr. wackerbath.

[_to horace._] i ought to tell you this is quite an _impromptu_ little
affair. the wife only came up this morning for a day or two in town, and
asked some old friends of ours to dinner. so i wired to you on the
off-chance of your being free to come and meet them.

mrs. wackerbath.

so kind of you to come on such short notice!

horace.

i was delighted.

mrs. wackerbath.

[_suddenly realising pringle's presence; to mr. wackerbath._] but,
samuel, aren't you forgetting to introduce your other guest?

horace.

[_to himself foreseeing trouble._] good lord!

[_he goes up round the table to the
glazed balcony._

mr. wackerbath.

[_surprised, to mrs. wackerbath._] my _other_? i was not aware[_he
turns and sees pringle, and advances to him._] you must excuse me, sir,
but i didn't see you before. i--ah--haven't the pleasure of knowing your
name--at present.

pringle.

[_coming forward._] my name is pringle. _yours_--[_meaningly_]--is quite
well known to me, mr. wackerbath.

mr. wackerbath.

[_gratified, but not surprised._] ha! very good of you to say so. and i
needn't tell you that any friend of mr. ventimore's

pringle.

[_tartly._] i am not here in that capacity, sir. i am here because i also
am expecting friends to dine with me. and i was certainly given to
understand that this room had been reserved for my _own_ party.

mrs. wackerbath.

[_in some distress._] oh, dear! i _am_ so sorry. i'm afraid _i'm_ to blame.
i asked the manager for this room--he told me it was engaged, but he would
arrange for you to have the "patience" room instead.

pringle.

i can only assure you that this is the first _i've_ heard of it, or
else

mrs. wackerbath.

[_rising._] i _quite_ thought it would be explained to you, and i do so
_hope_ the change hasn't put you to any great inconvenience?

pringle.

[_sourly._] i'm afraid, mrs. wackerbath, it has put my guests to
considerable inconvenience, as they have presumably been shown into the
"patience" room, and been waiting there for nearly half an hour--if they
haven't already left! so--[_making a movement towards the arch_]--if you
will kindly permit me

horace.

[_coming down, and intercepting him; in an under>tone._] you won't find
them there, pringle. they haven't come. they _won't_ come now, i assure
you.

professor's voice.

[_on left, outside door above arch._] this must be the room, sophia--i
observe "pinafore" on the door.

pringle.

[_in a triumphant undertone to horace, who is completely staggered._]
there! who's right _now_? i _knew_ they wouldn't forget!

[_he advances to the end of the
sofa by fireplace to receive the
futvoyes, while horace effaces
himself so far as possible in the
corner behind the flower-stand._

horace.

[_to himself in despair._] that old _fool_ of a fakrash! he's muffed it
again!

[_the futvoyes enter; mrs.
futvoye first, then sylvia, and
the professor bringing up the
rear._

pringle.

[_cheerily, to mrs. futvoye._] aha!

[_his welcome dies away as they all
pass on without seeming to notice
any one but mr. and mrs.
wackerbath, who advance from the
left to receive them. pringle
retreats slightly, and looks on in
speechless indignation._

mr. wackerbath.

my dear mrs. futvoye, delighted to see you--delighted! [_as mrs. futvoye
greets mrs. wackerbath, to sylvia._] and this smart young woman is my
little god-daughter, eh? how d'ye do, my dear? [_to professor._] and how is
our excellent professor?

[_they converse in by-play; mrs.
wackerbath takes mrs. futvoye to
sofa on left; sylvia goes up
towards arch to a place from which
she can see neither horace nor
pringle._

mrs. wackerbath.

[_to mrs. futvoye, as they seat themselves._] dearest

sophia! we meet so seldom now!

mrs. futvoye.

we do indeed, eliza!

[_they talk in undertones._

pringle.

[_by fireplace, to himself, with the deepest disgust._] first my room, and
then my guests!

mr. wackerbath.

[_turning to mrs. futvoye, as the professor joins sylvia._] i want to
introduce a friend of ours--very rising young fellow[_he looks round
for horace, and discovers him by the flower stand._] ah, _there_ he
is--mr. ventimore. [_horace pulls himself together and comes forward, not
in the least knowing what reception to expect._] mr. ventimore, mrs.
anthony futvoye.

[_horace bows in considerable
anxiety._

mrs. futvoye.

why, my dear mr. wackerbath, we know one another quite well already! [_to
horace, laughing._] don't we, horace?

[_horace takes her hand with
obvious relief._

sylvia.

[_coming down smiling, between mr. wackerbath and horace._] how are you,
horace?

[_horace shakes hands warmly with
her._

professor futvoye.

[_approaching as mr. wackerbath turns to his wife and mrs. futvoye, to
horace not over cordially, but without asperity._] how are you, ventimore?
curious we should meet like this! we were talking about you on our way
here--that little dinner of yours, you know.

horace.

[_with reviving anxiety._] that--little dinner, professor?

sylvia.

yes, horace, we _couldn't_ remember which night it is we're dining with
you--is it to-morrow, or the night after?

horace.

[_relieved again._] oh, it's to-morrow--to-morrow!

[_pringle has heard all this with a
contempt and disgust that are
indicated by his expression._

sylvia.

then mother _was_ right! i'd fearful misgivings that it was for _last_
night, and that somehow we'd forgotten all about it. wouldn't that have
been too dreadful of us?

horace.

oh, i--i don't know. i mean--i could have forgiven even _that_.

professor futvoye.

ah, now i think of it--[_interposing between sylvia and horace, and
drawing him apart, while sylvia goes up towards the table_]--did you find
time to attend that sale for me yesterday?

horace.

[_blankly._] oh, yes. i _attended_ it.

professor futvoye.

we called at your rooms yesterday afternoon, but you weren't in, so we
didn't wait for you. now tell me--[_anxiously_]--did you get any of those
lots for me, or didn't you?

horace.

well, no. i had the most rotten luck.

professor futvoye.

[_with relief._] it's just as well you didn't--just as well. i doubt now
whether i could afford the money. i find i shall be put to considerable
expense--for repairs to my study.

[_he turns to mr. wackerbath, who
is on his right. sylvia comes
down, and pringle advances to
greet her, but, finding she
evidently sees no one but horace,
he goes up towards the balcony
fuming with rage._

sylvia.

[_to horace._] come and sit down somewhere, and tell me everything you've
been doing.

[_horace takes her to the sofa by
the fireplace, where they sit down
and talk in dumb show, while
pringle is now hanging about
undecidedly near the flower-stand,
waiting his opportunity for
addressing sylvia, and furiously
jealous at finding her still too
absorbed to notice him_; mrs.
futvoye and mrs. wackerbath are
talking confidentially on the sofa
on the left side of the room, and
the professor and mr. wackerbath
are standing in the centre._

mr. wackerbath.

so you and my young friend ventimore are already acquainted, eh, professor?

professor futvoye.

why, yes. in fact, he's supposed to be engaged to sylvia. but, between
ourselves, i should feel more satisfied if there was any prospect of his
getting work.

mr. wackerbath.

my dear futvoye, you needn't be uneasy about _that_! why, this house he's
building for _me_ will find him work enough. he's an able young chap, and i
shouldn't be surprised if he gave me a perfect palace!

pringle.

[_who is near enough to hear this, comes down._] what, _another_ palace,
mr. wackerbath?

mr. wackerbath.

[_in some astonishment._] eh? why, bless my soul, sir, i thought you'd gone
to the "patience" room long ago!

pringle.

[_drily._] i found it wasn't necessary. how are you, professor? [_with the
air of a host._] delighted to see you.

professor futvoye.

[_shaking hands perfunctorily._] oh, how are you, my boy, how are you?
[_turning his shoulder on pringle, and continuing to mr. wackerbath,
as they go up together towards the table, ignoring pringle.] wackerbath,
about this house of yours?--do i understand that ventimore is?

[_they talk in dumb show, and
during the next few speeches the
first waiter enters, and mr.
wackerbath gives him an order,
after which the waiter goes out
and returns with two cocktails.
the professor sits by the table
and mr. wackerbath stands as they
drink. pringle meanwhile has
returned to the corner of the
flower-stand and is no longer able
to control his temper._

pringle.

[_to sylvia, with elaborate sarcasm, as he offers his hand, which she
does not see at first._] good evening, miss sylvia, it's really about time
that i reminded you of _my_ humble existence.

sylvia.

[_with slightly raised eyebrows, as she shakes hands._] oh, how do you do,
mr. pringle? i didn't see you come in.

[_horace sits by in silence,
feeling powerless to stop pringle
at present._

pringle.

[_unpleasantly._] no, you were so much engaged. [_in a tone of injury._]
and i must say i little expected when i last saw you at cottesmore
gardens--scarcely seven hours ago!

sylvia.

[_smiling, but surprised._] seven _hours_! it is more like seven _weeks_!

pringle.

[_beaming fatuously._] charming of you to put it in that way! i was almost
beginning to fear that you had forgotten--[_with meaning_]--our last
meeting.

sylvia.

[_innocently._] in vincent square yesterday afternoon? of course not. _i_
meant since you had been to see _us_. and that's _ages_ ago!

pringle.

[_blankly._] ages ago!

sylvia.

[_carelessly._] oh, you said you'd been away, or working hard, or
something, didn't you? _i_ forgive you. and so _you_ are dining with mr.
and mrs. wackerbath, too?

pringle.

[_stiffly._] with mr. and mrs.! pardon me, but i am under the
impression that _i_ am to have the honour of entertaining you.

sylvia.

[_rising; horace rising as she does._] entertaining _us_! why, what
_could_ have made you think that?

pringle.

[_in a low voice._] and you can throw me over like this! after all i've
done for you? oh, _sylvia_!

sylvia.

[_coldly._] i don't understand you a bit this evening, mr. pringle. but
there may have been some mistake. i will go and ask mother about it.

[_she crosses to behind the sofa on
which mrs. futvoye is seated, and
talks to her in dumb show, mrs.
futvoye appearing surprised by
what she hears. meanwhile._

pringle.

[_in a savage undertone to horace._] this is _your_ work! i see how it
is--you've made 'em _all_ knuckle down, somehow!

horace.

[_earnestly, in an undertone to him._] it isn't that, my dear fellow.
they've forgotten--utterly forgotten everything. and so will you if you're
a wise man.

pringle.

they may pretend to forget if they like! but i'm hanged if _i_ do!

mrs. futvoye.

[_who has risen, leaving sylvia to talk to mrs. wackerbath, now
advances to pringle._] _what_ is this sylvia tells me, mr. pringle? surely
you haven't been expecting us to dine with _you_ to-night?

pringle.

i not only _have_ been, i _am_, my dear lady.

mrs. futvoye.

then my husband must have[_turning to the professor, who is by the
table talking to mr. wackerbath._] anthony! [_the professor comes down._]
have you accepted an invitation from mr. pringle for to-night without
telling me? how _could_ you be so forgetful?

professor futvoye.

my memory has not begun to fail _yet_, sophia. [_to pringle._] my dear
pringle, i can only say that i received no such invitation. we had _no_
engagement for this evening till mrs. wackerbath kindly rang my wife up
this afternoon.

[_he takes a chair on the left by
mrs. wackerbath, and talks to
her._

mrs. futvoye.

your invitation must have been lost in the post, mr. pringle.

pringle.

hardly, as it happened to be given--and accepted--by word of mouth, mrs.
futvoye. however, since you seem to have found a subsequent engagement more
attractive, i have, of course, no option but to release you.

mrs. futvoye.

_release_ us! but, my dear mr. pringle, when we've assured you

pringle.

[_interrupting her with chilly magnanimity._] pray say no more. i quite
understand the situation--_quite_.

[mrs. futvoye rejoins sylvia,
while mr. wackerbath, who has
gradually drawn nearer, now comes
forward genially._

mr. wackerbath.

[_to pringle._] i think, sir, we can find a simple way out of this little
difficulty. if you will waive the point of my being--ah--personally unknown
to you, and give my wife and myself the pleasure of joining our little
party--[_the others suppress their dismay_]--we shall _all_ be happy.

pringle.

well, mr. wackerbath, if you think it will contribute to the general
gaiety, i--i don't mind if i _do_ join your party.

mr. wackerbath.

[_astonished, and with a touch of hauteur._] h'm! that's very obliging of
you! [_looking round._] where are those waiter-fellows?

[_he goes up beyond the arch and
beckons; the first and second
waiters come in, and he explains
in dumb show that he wants another
cover laid. one waiter rearranges
the chairs, the other brings plate
and glasses. mr. wackerbath then
seems to find that the table is too
near the balcony, and orders it to
be moved down, which is done under
his instructions._

sylvia.

[_as mr. wackerbath goes up to find the waiters, to her mother, in an
undertone._] mother, what is the matter with mr. pringle? he seems
quite--quite _odd_.

mrs. futvoye.

i can't make him out at all, my dear. he seems to be offended with us--and
for no reason that _i_ can see.

sylvia.

nor i.

[_they continue the conversation in
dumb show, while the professor,
on a chair, is talking to mrs.
wackerbath on the sofa on the
left._

pringle.

[_in an undertone to horace, as they stand by the fireplace on the
right._] i suppose you know _why_ i've accepted that fellow's hospitality?

horace.

not in the least--but i hope you don't mean to abuse it.

pringle.

i mean to show up the lot of you! i'm going to be the skeleton at your
feast.

horace.

"an agreeable rattle," eh?

pringle.

it's too sickening! all of 'em grovelling and cringing to you because
they're in a blue funk of that old fakrash! you've managed to get him under
control again!

horace.

[_with much earnestness._] now, my dear fellow--i'll explain everything
when we're alone. but, for heaven's sake, take my advice and keep quiet
_here_!

pringle.

[_roughly._] i'm not afraid of you, or your jinnee either--he rather _took_
to me! and if the futvoyes choose to drop me like this, i'm not going to
take it lying down--i can make _them_ look pretty foolish!

horace.

you'll be the only one to look foolish--upon my honour, you will!

pringle.

we'll see about that! you can't shut _my_ mouth!

mr. wackerbath.

[_the waiters having gone out, now comes down and addresses mrs.
futvoye._] they tell me we shall have to wait a few minutes longer--but
they'll be as quick as they can.

mrs. wackerbath.

oh, samuel, the professor has just been telling me about such an
extraordinary affair that happened this morning--in his own study! have you
heard?

[_horace starts; pringle prepares
to assume the offensive._

mr. wackerbath.

not a word--not a word. what was it, futvoye? nothing, i hope, of--ah--an
unpleasant nature!

pringle.

[_striking in before the professor can reply._] "unpleasant"? oh, _dear_
no! [_coming forward to centre._] _quite_ an ordinary occurrence! ha-ha!

[_general surprise._

mrs. futvoye.

[_with annoyance._] i don't know why mr. pringle should choose to answer
for my husband. [_to mr. wackerbath._] we considered it _most_ unpleasant.
in fact, we can only be thankful it was no worse!

pringle.

but _are_ you thankful? i haven't noticed any signs of it, _so_ far!

horace.

[_in his ear._] shut up, can't you?

mrs. futvoye.

_really_, mr. pringle! [_to mr. wackerbath._] i was _about_ to say--when
mr. pringle interrupted me--that my husband found, on going into his study
after lunch this afternoon, that it was completely wrecked.

mr. wackerbath.

wrecked? you don't say so!

mrs. futvoye.

everything--bookcases, all his ancient glass and pottery

professor futvoye.

a valuable mummy!

mrs. futvoye.

absolutely smashed to atoms!

mr. wackerbath.

dear me! how unfortunate! [_to the professor._] and have you any clue to
the--ah--culprit?

pringle.

[_with a wild sardonic laugh._] ho-ho! he's no _idea_ who the--ah--culprit
is. _have_ you, professor?

[_renewed astonishment._

professor futvoye.

[_glaring at pringle._] i can only surmise. _my_ theory is that burglars
must have broken in during the night, and that the scoundrels, disgusted at
finding nothing of any value to _them_, revenged themselves by doing this
irreparable damage.

pringle.

bravo, professor! does you credit, that theory of yours! _most_ ingenious!
_must_ have been burglars, of course! with gout in all their four legs--eh,
mrs. futvoye?

[_mrs. futvoye regards him with
puzzled displeasure._

horace.

[_in pringle's ear._] _will_ you hold your confounded tongue!

mrs. wackerbath.

[_to the professor._] the wretches! but what a mercy that you weren't
disturbed!

pringle.

oh, the professor wasn't disturbed--not _he_! "preserved perfect calm and
self-control from first to last"--_didn't_ you, professor?

professor futvoye.

[_acidly._] as i was sound asleep during the whole business, sir, i presume
i _did_.

pringle.

ha-ha! sound asleep, eh? but you must have had a touch of nightmare when
_i_ saw you.

professor futvoye.

when you! [_rising and coming towards him._] how and when could _you_
possibly have seen me, pringle?

pringle.

oh, in your study. when you were lashing out at everything--with your hind
legs.

[_general sensation; mrs.
wackerbath and mrs. futvoye both
rise, and, with sylvia, come
somewhat nearer pringle._

professor futvoye.

with my hind legs!... d'you know, my dear pringle, you're talking rather
wildly?

pringle.

it won't do, professor, it won't do! i was _there_, remember. and lucky for
you i _was_--or you'd be a wall-eyed mule at this very moment.
[_exasperated by the futvoyes' apparent astonishment._] oh, it may suit
you to forget it _now_--but you were all three--especially sylvia--grateful
enough to me _then_!

[_increased sensation._

mrs. futvoye.

grateful to you? may i ask what for?

pringle.

i suppose you won't deny that i was the only one who could tackle
ventimore's old jinnee?

mrs. futvoye.

[_in a tone of hopeless bewilderment._] horace! _does_ he mean that
pleasant elderly landlady of yours?

pringle.

as if you didn't _know_, mrs. futvoye! i mean the old demon, or whatever he
may be, that ventimore let out of that brass bottle.

all the others (except horace).

[_together._] brass bottle! _what_ brass bottle? what _is_ he talking
about?

pringle.

i'm talking about the bottle he bought for you at that auction yesterday,
professor. you can surely remember _that_?

professor futvoye.

i certainly _did_ ask him to attend a sale. [_approaching horace._] but i
understood you to say just now, ventimore, that you bought nothing for me?

horace.

that is so, professor. as i told you, i was--unlucky.

mr. wackerbath.

[_regarding pringle with dignified displeasure._] you seem to me, sir, to
be endeavouring to be--ah--facetious.

pringle.

[_turning on him._] no more facetious, mr. wackerbath, than _you_ were when
i saw you this morning in ventimore's office.

mr. wackerbath.

i didn't _go_ to mr. ventimore's office. i entirely forgot the
appointment--an unusual thing for _me_.

pringle.

oh, no. you did an even _more_ unusual thing. you were _there_--running
about on all fours, and yelping like a dog!

mr. wackerbath.

[_hardly believing his own ears._] running about on all fours! yelping like
a dog! me? _me!_

pringle.

yes, _you_. the jinnee made you do it, if you remember, because you
declined to live in that palace he built for you in a single night. and you
didn't seem to like the idea of having to cross westminster bridge on all
fours!

mr. wackerbath.

[_with dignity._] i'm afraid, sir, that when you accepted my invitation
just now, you overlooked the fact that you had been dining _already_.

pringle.

i haven't dined since last night--in that arabian hall of ventimore's, with
black slaves to wait, and dancing-girls. professor, _don't_ pretend you've
forgotten those dancing-girls!

[_everybody speechless with
indignation and surprise, except
the professor, who comes towards
him with concern._

professor futvoye.

[_soothingly, to pringle._] there, there--you mustn't get excited about it.
[_he turns, and takes mr. wackerbath aside._] it's not what _you_ think.
poor fellow! _his_ only excess is overwork. [_turning to pringle again._]
now, now, pringle, my dear fellow, you're not--not quite yourself, you
know--not quite _yourself_! take my advice and go quietly home, and ask
your doctor to come and have a look at you.

pringle.

[_staggered._] so--so you're trying to make out now that--that i'm _mad_,
are you?

professor futvoye.

mad? no, no--only a little out of sorts. you've been working rather too
hard, you know, that's all! all you want is a thorough rest.

mr. wackerbath.

yes, yes. a sea-voyage, now. trip round the world. set you up in no time!

mrs. futvoye.

[_approaching pringle._] _do_ go round the world, mr. pringle. you'll come
back cured of all these fancies!

pringle.

[_reeling back a step or two._] fancies!... ventimore! [_horace goes to
him, while the others form a group on the left and discuss pringle's case
with pitying concern._] i've been a fool--i see that now. they're not
pretending--they really _have_ forgotten!

horace.

completely. fakrash hasn't foozled _that_--for a wonder! i ought to have
included _you_; but--well, one can't think of _everything_--i forgot. i can
only say i'm sorry.

pringle.

but they all think i'm mad! [_he sinks on the sofa by fireplace._] _you_
know i'm not _that_! [_with sudden doubt._] _am_ i?

horace.

[_patting him on the shoulder._] not a bit, my dear fellow,--you're as sane
as i am.

pringle.

[_with relief._] i _knew_ i was! but _tell_ 'em so--tell 'em it's all true!

horace.

i can't. they'd only think _i_ was mad, too.

pringle.

[_in despair._] but you _must_ get me out of this somehow,--or i shall be
ruined! who'd employ a mad architect?

horace.

[_reflecting._] i'll get you out of it, if i can. but i shall have to
stretch the truth a bit,--so mind you back up everything i say.

pringle.

i will--i will! i'll say anything, do anything!

horace.

then here goes! [_he turns to the others, and comes towards centre._] oh,
er--mrs. wackerbath--[_the others break off their conversation and listen
to him_]--i've found out what's the matter with mr. pringle,--and i know
you'll all be glad to hear that it's nothing serious. [_murmur of
sympathetic relief from the others._] it seems he's been spending the
afternoon with his dentist, and--[_turning to pringle_]--was it two or
_three_ back teeth you had out, pringle?

pringle.

[_sullenly._] one. only _one_.

horace.

[_to the others._] only _one_. but under an anæsthetic. [_to pringle, as
before._] nitrous oxide, pringle, or ether?

pringle.

i can't say--i didn't inquire.

horace.

[_to the others._] naturally--he _wouldn't_ inquire. but--well, _you_ know
what ef--i mean, anæsthetics _are_!

all (except pringle).

to be sure! yes, yes. of course!

horace.

they give you the queerest dreams. and, just before, as it happens, mr.
pringle had been reading "the arabian nights." [_to pringle._] you _did_
say "the arabian nights," didn't you?

pringle.

"the arabian nights"--yes. i read it regularly.

horace.

[_to the others, airily._] which probably accounts for his dreams. and, in
some exceptional cases, the efreets--i mean, the _effects_--don't go off
altogether for hours after the operation. mr. pringle thinks he can't have
been thoroughly awake

pringle.

[_rising._] but i am now--i am _now_!

horace.

oh, he is _now_--quite serious and sensible, and generally himself again.

[_a general murmur of polite
satisfaction._

mr. wackerbath.

[_advancing towards pringle._] i'm sure i'm very pleased to hear it, mr.
pringle! especially as it permits us to hope that we may still have
the--ah--pleasure of your company.

[_the others echo this sentiment in
a somewhat half-hearted manner._

pringle.

you're extremely kind--but i think perhaps i shall be better at home.

mrs. futvoye.

[_in a motherly tone._] i'm _sure_ you will, dear mr. pringle. what _you_
ought to do is to go to bed and get a good night's sleep.

mr. wackerbath.

[_obviously relieved._] ah, well, i won't insist--i won't insist. perhaps
you will give us some other evening?

pringle.

[_with extreme stiffness._] i'm obliged to you--but i dine out very seldom.
good-night. [_he crosses to mrs. futvoye and shakes hands with her, and
bows to mr. and mrs. wackerbath, after which mr. wackerbath takes_
mrs. futvoye up to the glazed balcony to see the river, which by this time
is in bright moonlight, the professor, after having said good-night to
pringle, following with mrs. wackerbath. pringle then turns to sylvia,
who is standing on the extreme left._] good-night, miss sylvia. may i
offer my congratulations? i can only hope that you may be as happy--as
happy as--as _possible_.

[_faint waltz music is heard from
the restaurant._

sylvia.

[_quietly._] thanks so much, mr. pringle, i think i _shall_. [_giving him
her hand._] good-night.

[_she goes up and joins the group
in the glazed balcony._

pringle.

good-night. [_he turns to horace._] one moment, ventimore!

horace.

oh, i'm coming to the door with you, old fellow.

[_he is about to go up with him,
when pringle detains him._

pringle.

i only wanted to ask you this. [_lowering his voice._] where _is_ that
jinnee of yours now?

horace.

[_standing by the sofa by fireplace._] well,--do you see that patch of
silver on the water just above the bridge--[_pointing to the left_]--where
they're all looking?

pringle.

yes, i see that. what _about_ it?

horace.

only that, somewhere under that patch, old fakrash is lying, snugly curled
up inside his bottle.

pringle.

[_incredulously._] what!

horace.

i happen to know, because i dropped it there myself this afternoon inside a
kit-bag.

pringle.

well, i must say i'm glad you've got rid of him. and--er--you can rely on
me to keep quiet about it for the future.

horace.

[_drily._] my dear chap, i feel _sure_ i can.

pringle.

[_going up to the door on right above the arch._] good-night.
[_disconsolately._] i shall go and get something to eat at an "a.b.c."

horace.

[_going up with him._] good-night, old fellow. it's rough on you, but i did
my _best_!

pringle.

[_turning on him with resentment._] you needn't have told 'em i'd had
_three_ teeth out! good-night.

[_he goes out, horace closing the
door after him. waltz music from
restaurant on right. after he has
gone, mr. wackerbath and the
others turn from the river as the
second waiter enters and places a
slice of melon on each plate._

mr. wackerbath.

oh, ready, eh? [_the first waiter enters and intimates that dinner is
served._] then shall we sit down, mrs. futvoye? [_he goes to the chair at
the top of the table with his back to the balcony, and places mrs. futvoye
on his right._] professor--[_as mrs. wackerbath takes the chair at the
bottom of the table, facing the river_]--on my wife's left, please. sylvia,
my dear, next to me. [_sylvia takes the chair on mr. wackerbath's left;
horace still standing._] and you, mr. ventimore[_observing that there
are two places._] stay, there's _something_ wrong. oh, of course! [_to
the first waiter._] take away that chair, it won't be wanted now--the other
gentleman has gone.

first waiter.

gone! de gentleman vat give so moch trouble? he vill not come back?

mr. wackerbath.

come back? [_to horace._] you don't think your friend is likely to do
_that_, eh, mr. ventimore?

sylvia.

oh, i _hope_ not!

[_the others assent fervently._

horace.

[_pausing in the act of taking the sixth chair._] it's all right. my
friend--[_with a glance at the bridge on the left_]--the gentleman who gave
so much trouble, is--[_with a slow smile of deep satisfaction_]--not in the
least likely to come back!

[_he sits down by sylvia as
another and a louder burst of waltz
music is heard from the restaurant
and the curtain falls._

the end.

printed by
ballantyne & company ltd
at the ballantyne press
tavistock street covent garden
london

e-text prepared by david clarke, martin pettit, and the project gutenberg
online distributed proofreading team (http://www.pgdp.net)

the brass bottle

by

f. anstey

first published, october, 1900

contents

chapter                                                 page

i. horace ventimore receives a commission              1

ii. a cheap lot                                        12

iii. an unexpected opening                              18

iv. at large                                           31

v. carte blanche                                      36

vi. embarras de richesses                              51

vii. "gratitude--a lively sense of favours to come"     62

viii. bachelor's quarters                                75

ix. "persicos odi, puer, apparatus"                    85

x. no place like home!                               107

xi. a fool's paradise                                 115

xii. the messenger of hope                             132

xiii. a choice of evils                                 143

xiv. "since there's no help, come, let us kiss
and part!"                                      158

xv. blushing honours                                  174

xvi. a killing frost                                   182

xvii. high words                                        193

xviii. a game of bluff                                   204

the epilogue                                      222

the brass bottle

chapter i

horace ventimore receives a commission

"this day six weeks--just six weeks ago!" horace ventimore said, half
aloud, to himself, and pulled out his watch. "half-past twelve--what was
i doing at half-past twelve?"

as he sat at the window of his office in great cloister street,
westminster, he made his thoughts travel back to a certain glorious
morning in august which now seemed so remote and irrecoverable. at this
precise time he was waiting on the balcony of the hôtel de la plage--the
sole hostelry of st. luc-en-port, the tiny normandy watering-place upon
which, by some happy inspiration, he had lighted during a solitary
cycling tour--waiting until she should appear.

he could see the whole scene: the tiny cove, with the violet shadow of
the cliff sleeping on the green water; the swell of the waves lazily
lapping against the diving-board from which he had plunged half an hour
before; he remembered the long swim out to the buoy; the exhilarated
anticipation with which he had dressed and climbed the steep path to the
hotel terrace.

for was he not to pass the whole remainder of that blissful day in
sylvia futvoye's society? were they not to cycle together (there were,
of course, others of the party--but they did not count), to cycle over
to veulettes, to picnic there under the cliff, and ride back--always
together--in the sweet-scented dusk, over the slopes, between the
poplars or the cornfields glowing golden against a sky of warm purple?

now he saw himself going round to the gravelled courtyard in front of
the hotel with a sudden dread of missing her. there was nothing there
but the little low cart, with its canvas tilt which was to convey
professor futvoye and his wife to the place of _rendezvous_.

there was sylvia at last, distractingly fair and fresh in her cool pink
blouse and cream-coloured skirt; how gracious and friendly and generally
delightful she had been throughout that unforgettable day, which was
supreme amongst others only a little less perfect, and all now fled for
ever!

they had had drawbacks, it was true. old futvoye was perhaps the least
bit of a bore at times, with his interminable disquisitions on egyptian
art and ancient oriental character-writing, in which he seemed convinced
that horace must feel a perfervid interest, as, indeed, he thought it
politic to affect. the professor was a most learned archæologist, and
positively bulged with information on his favourite subjects; but it is
just possible that horace might have been less curious concerning the
distinction between cuneiform and aramæan or kufic and arabic
inscriptions if his informant had happened to be the father of anybody
else. however, such insincerities as these are but so many evidences of
sincerity.

so with self-tormenting ingenuity horace conjured up various pictures
from that norman holiday of his: the little half-timbered cottages with
their faded blue shutters and the rushes growing out of their thatch
roofs; the spires of village churches gleaming above the bronze-green
beeches; the bold headlands, their ochre and yellow cliffs contrasting
grimly with the soft ridges of the turf above them; the tethered
black-and-white cattle grazing peacefully against a background of lapis
lazuli and malachite sea, and in every scene the sensation of sylvia's
near presence, the sound of her voice in his ears. and now?... he looked
up from the papers and tracing-cloth on his desk, and round the small
panelled room which served him as an office, at the framed plans and
photographs, the set squares and t squares on the walls, and felt a dull
resentment against his surroundings. from his window he commanded a
cheerful view of a tall, mouldering wall, once part of the abbey
boundaries, surmounted by _chevaux-de-frise_, above whose
rust-attenuated spikes some plane trees stretched their yellowing
branches.

"she would have come to care for me," horace's thoughts ran on,
disjointedly. "i could have sworn that that last day of all--and her
people didn't seem to object to me. her mother asked me cordially enough
to call on them when they were back in town. when i did"

when he had called, there had been a difference--not an unusual sequel
to an acquaintanceship begun in a continental watering-place. it was
difficult to define, but unmistakable--a certain formality and
constraint on mrs. futvoye's part, and even on sylvia's, which seemed
intended to warn him that it is not every friendship that survives the
channel passage. so he had gone away sore at heart, but fully
recognising that any advances in future must come from their side. they
might ask him to dinner, or at least to call again; but more than a
month had passed, and they had made no sign. no, it was all over; he
must consider himself dropped.

"after all," he told himself, with a short and anything but mirthful
laugh, "it's natural enough. mrs. futvoye has probably been making
inquiries about my professional prospects. it's better as it is. what
earthly chance have i got of marrying unless i can get work of my own?
it's all i can do to keep myself decently. i've no right to dream of
asking any one--to say nothing of sylvia--to marry me. i should only be
rushing into temptation if i saw any more of her. she's not for a poor
beggar like me, who was born unlucky. well, whining won't do any
good--let's have a look at beevor's latest performance."

he spread out a large coloured plan, in a corner of which appeared the
name of "william beevor, architect," and began to study it in a spirit
of anything but appreciation.

"beevor gets on," he said to himself. "heaven knows that i don't grudge
him his success. he's a good fellow--though he _does_ build
architectural atrocities, and seem to like 'em. who am i to give myself
airs? he's successful--i'm not. yet if i only had his opportunities,
what wouldn't i make of them!"

let it be said here that this was not the ordinary self-delusion of an
incompetent. ventimore really had talent above the average, with ideals
and ambitions which might under better conditions have attained
recognition and fulfilment before this.

but he was not quite energetic enough, besides being too proud, to push
himself into notice, and hitherto he had met with persistent ill-luck.

so horace had no other occupation now but to give beevor, whose offices
and clerk he shared, such slight assistance as he might require, and it
was by no means cheering to feel that every year of this enforced
semi-idleness left him further handicapped in the race for wealth and
fame, for he had already passed his twenty-eighth birthday.

if miss sylvia futvoye had indeed felt attracted towards him at one time
it was not altogether incomprehensible. horace ventimore was not a model
of manly beauty--models of manly beauty are rare out of novels, and
seldom interesting in them; but his clear-cut, clean-shaven face
possessed a certain distinction, and if there were faint satirical lines
about the mouth, they were redeemed by the expression of the grey-blue
eyes, which were remarkably frank and pleasant. he was well made, and
tall enough to escape all danger of being described as short;
fair-haired and pale, without being unhealthily pallid, in complexion,
and he gave the impression of being a man who took life as it came, and
whose sense of humour would serve as a lining for most clouds that might
darken his horizon.

there was a rap at the door which communicated with beevor's office, and
beevor himself, a florid, thick-set man, with small side-whiskers, burst
in.

"i say, ventimore, you didn't run off with the plans for that house i'm
building at larchmere, did you? because--ah, i see you're looking over
them. sorry to deprive you, but"

"thanks, old fellow, take them, by all means. i've seen all i wanted to
see."

"well, i'm just off to larchmere now. want to be there to check the
quantities, and there's my other house at fittlesdon. i must go on
afterwards and set it out, so i shall probably be away some days. i'm
taking harrison down, too. you won't be wanting him, eh?"

ventimore laughed. "i can manage to do nothing without a clerk to help
me. your necessity is greater than mine. here are the plans."

"i'm rather pleased with 'em myself, you know," said beevor; "that roof
ought to look well, eh? good idea of mine lightening the slate with that
ornamental tile-work along the top. you saw i put in one of your windows
with just a trifling addition. i was almost inclined to keep both gables
alike, as you suggested, but it struck me a little variety--one red
brick and the other 'parged'--would be more out-of-the-way."

"oh, much," agreed ventimore, knowing that to disagree was useless.

"not, mind you," continued beevor, "that i believe in going in for too
much originality in domestic architecture. the average client no more
wants an original house than he wants an original hat; he wants
something he won't feel a fool in. i've often thought, old man, that
perhaps the reason why you haven't got onyou don't mind my speaking
candidly, do you?"

"not a bit," said ventimore, cheerfully. "candour's the cement of
friendship. dab it on."

"well, i was only going to say that you do yourself no good by all those
confoundedly unconventional ideas of yours. if you had your chance
to-morrow, it's my belief you'd throw it away by insisting on some
fantastic fad or other."

"these speculations are a trifle premature, considering that there
doesn't seem the remotest prospect of my ever getting a chance at all."

"i got mine before i'd set up six months," said beevor. "the great
thing, however," he went on, with a flavour of personal application, "is
to know how to use it when it _does_ come. well, i must be off if i mean
to catch that one o'clock from waterloo. you'll see to anything that may
come in for me while i'm away, won't you, and let me know? oh, by the
way, the quantity surveyor has just sent in the quantities for that
schoolroom at woodford--do you mind running through them and seeing
they're right? and there's the specification for the new wing at
tusculum lodge--you might draft that some time when you've nothing else
to do. you'll find all the papers on my desk. thanks awfully, old chap."

and beevor hurried back to his own room, where for the next few minutes
he could be heard bustling harrison, the clerk, to make haste; then a
hansom was whistled for, there were footsteps down the old stairs, the
sounds of a departing vehicle on the uneven stones, and after that
silence and solitude.

it was not in nature to avoid feeling a little envious. beevor had work
to do in the world: even if it chiefly consisted in profaning sylvan
retreats by smug or pretentious villas, it was still work which
entitled him to consideration and respect in the eyes of all
right-minded persons.

and nobody believed in horace; as yet he had never known the
satisfaction of seeing the work of his brain realised in stone and brick
and mortar; no building stood anywhere to bear testimony to his
existence and capability long after he himself should have passed away.

it was not a profitable train of thought, and, to escape from it, he
went into beevor's room and fetched the documents he had mentioned--at
least they would keep him occupied until it was time to go to his club
and lunch. he had no sooner settled down to his calculations, however,
when he heard a shuffling step on the landing, followed by a knock at
beevor's office-door. "more work for beevor," he thought; "what luck the
fellow has! i'd better go in and explain that he's just left town on
business."

but on entering the adjoining room he heard the knocking repeated--this
time at his own door; and hastening back to put an end to this somewhat
undignified form of hide-and-seek, he discovered that this visitor at
least was legitimately his, and was, in fact, no other than professor
anthony futvoye himself.

the professor was standing in the doorway peering short-sightedly
through his convex glasses, his head protruded from his loosely-fitting
great-coat with an irresistible suggestion of an inquiring tortoise. to
horace his appearance was more welcome than that of the wealthiest
client--for why should sylvia's father take the trouble to pay him this
visit unless he still wished to continue the acquaintanceship? it might
even be that he was the bearer of some message or invitation.

so, although to an impartial eye the professor might not seem the kind
of elderly gentleman whose society would produce any wild degree of
exhilaration, horace was unfeignedly delighted to see him.

"extremely kind of you to come and see me like this, sir," he said
warmly, after establishing him in the solitary armchair reserved for
hypothetical clients.

"not at all. i'm afraid your visit to cottesmore gardens some time ago
was somewhat of a disappointment."

"a disappointment?" echoed horace, at a loss to know what was coming
next.

"i refer to the fact--which possibly, however, escaped your
notice"--explained the professor, scratching his scanty patch of
grizzled whisker with a touch of irascibility, "that i myself was not at
home on that occasion."

"indeed, i was greatly disappointed," said horace, "though of course i
know how much you are engaged. it's all the more good of you to spare
time to drop in for a chat just now."

"i've not come to chat, mr. ventimore. i never chat. i wanted to see you
about a matter which i thought you might be so obliging as to but i
observe you are busy--probably too busy to attend to such a small
affair."

it was clear enough now; the professor was going to build, and had
decided--could it be at sylvia's suggestion?--to entrust the work to
him! but he contrived to subdue any self-betraying eagerness, and reply
(as he could with perfect truth) that he had nothing on hand just then
which he could not lay aside, and that if the professor would let him
know what he required, he would take it up at once.

"so much the better," said the professor; "so much the better. both my
wife and daughter declared that it was making far too great a demand
upon your good nature; but, as i told them, 'i am much mistaken,' i
said, 'if mr. ventimore's practice is so extensive that he cannot leave
it for one afternoon'"

evidently it was not a house. could he be needed to escort them
somewhere that afternoon? even that was more than he had hoped for a few
minutes since. he hastened to repeat that he was perfectly free that
afternoon.

"in that case," said the professor, beginning to fumble in all his
pockets--was he searching for a note in sylvia's handwriting?--"in that
case, you will be conferring a real favour on me if you can make it
convenient to attend a sale at hammond's auction rooms in covent garden,
and just bid for one or two articles on my behalf."

whatever disappointment ventimore felt, it may be said to his credit
that he allowed no sign of it to appear. "of course i'll go, with
pleasure," he said, "if i can be of any use."

"i knew i shouldn't come to you in vain," said the professor. "i
remembered your wonderful good nature, sir, in accompanying my wife and
daughter on all sorts of expeditions in the blazing hot weather we had
at st. luc--when you might have remained quietly at the hotel with me.
not that i should trouble you now, only i have to lunch at the oriental
club, and i've an appointment afterwards to examine and report on a
recently-discovered inscribed cylinder for the museum, which will fully
occupy the rest of the afternoon, so that it's physically impossible for
me to go to hammond's myself, and i strongly object to employing a
broker when i can avoid it. where did i put that catalogue?... ah, here
it is. this was sent to me by the executors of my old friend, general
collingham, who died the other day. i met him at nakada when i was out
excavating some years ago. he was something of a collector in his way,
though he knew very little about it, and, of course, was taken in right
and left. most of his things are downright rubbish, but there are just a
few lots that are worth securing, at a reasonable figure, by some one
who knew what he was about."

"but, my dear professor," remonstrated horace, not relishing this
responsibility, "i'm afraid i'm as likely as not to pick up some of the
rubbish. i've no special knowledge of oriental curios."

"at st. luc," said the professor, "you impressed me as having, for an
amateur, an exceptionally accurate and comprehensive acquaintance with
egyptian and arabian art from the earliest period." (if this were so,
horace could only feel with shame what a fearful humbug he must have
been.) "however, i've no wish to lay too heavy a burden on you, and, as
you will see from this catalogue, i have ticked off the lots in which i
am chiefly interested, and made a note of the limit to which i am
prepared to bid, so you'll have no difficulty."

"very well," said horace; "i'll go straight to covent garden, and slip
out and get some lunch later on."

"well, perhaps, if you don't mind. the lots i have marked seem to come
on at rather frequent intervals, but don't let that consideration deter
you from getting your lunch, and if you _should_ miss anything by not
being on the spot, why, it's of no consequence, though i don't say it
mightn't be a pity. in any case, you won't forget to mark what each lot
fetches, and perhaps you wouldn't mind dropping me a line when you
return the catalogue--or stay, could you look in some time after dinner
this evening, and let me know how you got on?--that would be better."

horace thought it would be decidedly better, and undertook to call and
render an account of his stewardship that evening. there remained the
question of a deposit, should one or more of the lots be knocked down to
him; and, as he was obliged to own that he had not so much as ten pounds
about him at that particular moment, the professor extracted a note for
that amount from his case, and handed it to him with the air of a
benevolent person relieving a deserving object. "don't exceed my
limits," he said, "for i can't afford more just now; and mind you give
hammond your own name, not mine. if the dealers get to know i'm after
the things, they'll run you up. and now, i don't think i need detain you
any longer, especially as time is running on. i'm sure i can trust you
to do the best you can for me. till this evening, then."

a few minutes later horace was driving up to covent garden behind the
best-looking horse he could pick out.

the professor might have required from him rather more than was strictly
justified by their acquaintanceship, and taken his acquiescence too much
as a matter of course--but what of that? after all, he was sylvia's
parent.

"even with _my_ luck," he was thinking, "i ought to succeed in getting
at least one or two of the lots he's marked; and if i can only please
him, something may come of it."

and in this sanguine mood horace entered messrs. hammond's well-known
auction rooms.

chapter ii

a cheap lot

in spite of the fact that it was the luncheon hour when ventimore
reached hammond's auction rooms, he found the big, skylighted gallery
where the sale of the furniture and effects of the late general
collingham was proceeding crowded to a degree which showed that the
deceased officer had some reputation as a _connoisseur_.

the narrow green baize tables below the auctioneer's rostrum were
occupied by professional dealers, one or two of them women, who sat,
paper and pencil in hand, with much the same air of apparent apathy and
real vigilance that may be noticed in the casino at monte carlo. around
them stood a decorous and businesslike crowd, mostly dealers, of various
types. on a magisterial-looking bench sat the auctioneer, conducting the
sale with a judicial impartiality and dignity which forbade him, even in
his most laudatory comments, the faintest accent of enthusiasm.

the october sunshine, striking through the glazed roof, re-gilded the
tarnished gas-stars, and suffused the dusty atmosphere with palest gold.
but somehow the utter absence of excitement in the crowd, the calm,
methodical tone of the auctioneer, and the occasional mournful cry of
"lot here, gentlemen!" from the porter when any article was too large to
move, all served to depress ventimore's usually mercurial spirits.

for all horace knew, the collection as a whole might be of little value,
but it very soon became clear that others besides professor futvoye had
singled out such gems as there were, also that the professor had
considerably under-rated the prices they were likely to fetch.

ventimore made his bids with all possible discretion, but time after
time he found the competition for some perforated mosque lantern,
engraved ewer, or ancient porcelain tile so great that his limit was
soon reached, and his sole consolation was that the article eventually
changed hands for sums which were very nearly double the professor's
estimate.

several dealers and brokers, despairing of a bargain that day, left,
murmuring profanities; most of those who remained ceased to take a
serious interest in the proceedings, and consoled themselves with cheap
witticisms at every favourable occasion.

the sale dragged slowly on, and, what with continual disappointment and
want of food, horace began to feel so weary that he was glad, as the
crowd thinned, to get a seat at one of the green baize tables, by which
time the skylights had already changed from livid grey to slate colour
in the deepening dusk.

a couple of meek burmese buddhas had just been put up, and bore the
indignity of being knocked down for nine-and-sixpence the pair with
dreamy, inscrutable simpers; horace only waited for the final lot marked
by the professor--an old persian copper bowl, inlaid with silver and
engraved round the rim with an inscription from hafiz.

the limit to which he was authorised to go was two pounds ten; but, so
desperately anxious was ventimore not to return empty-handed, that he
had made up his mind to bid an extra sovereign if necessary, and say
nothing about it.

however, the bowl was put up, and the bidding soon rose to three pounds
ten, four pounds, four pounds ten, five pounds, five guineas, for which
last sum it was acquired by a bearded man on horace's right, who
immediately began to regard his purchase with a more indulgent eye.

ventimore had done his best, and failed; there was no reason now why he
should stay a moment longer--and yet he sat on, from sheer fatigue and
disinclination to move.

"now we come to lot 254, gentlemen," he heard the auctioneer saying,
mechanically; "a capital egyptian mummy-case in fine con no, i beg
pardon, i'm wrong. this is an article which by some mistake has been
omitted from the catalogue, though it ought to have been in it.
everything on sale to-day, gentlemen, belonged to the late general
collingham. we'll call this no. 253_a_. antique brass bottle. very
curious."

one of the porters carried the bottle in between the tables, and set it
down before the dealers at the farther end with a tired nonchalance.

it was an old, squat, pot-bellied vessel, about two feet high, with a
long thick neck, the mouth of which was closed by a sort of metal
stopper or cap; there was no visible decoration on its sides, which were
rough and pitted by some incrustation that had formed on them, and been
partially scraped off. as a piece of _bric-à-brac_ it certainly
possessed few attractions, and there was a marked tendency to "guy" it
among the more frivolous brethren.

"what do you call this, sir?" inquired one of the auctioneer, with the
manner of a cheeky boy trying to get a rise out of his form-master. "is
it as 'unique' as the others?"

"you're as well able to judge as i am," was the guarded reply. "any one
can see for himself it's not modern rubbish."

"make a pretty little ornament for the mantelpiece!" remarked a wag.

"is the top made to unscrew, or what, sir?" asked a third. "seems fixed
on pretty tight."

"i can't say. probably it has not been removed for some time."

"it's a goodish weight," said the chief humorist, after handling it.
"what's inside of it, sir--sardines?"

"i don't represent it as having anything inside it," said the
auctioneer. "if you want to know my opinion, i think there's money in
it."

"'ow much?"

"don't misunderstand me, gentlemen. when i say i consider there's money
in it, i'm not alluding to its contents. i've no reason to believe that
it contains anything. i'm merely suggesting the thing itself may be
worth more than it looks."

"ah, it might be _that_ without 'urting itself!"

"well, well, don't let us waste time. look upon it as a pure
speculation, and make me an offer for it, some of you. come."

"tuppence-'ap'ny!" cried the comic man, affecting to brace himself for a
mighty effort.

"pray be serious, gentlemen. we want to get on, you know. anything to
make a start. five shillings? it's not the value of the metal, but i'll
take the bid. six. look at it well. it's not an article you come across
every day of your lives."

the bottle was still being passed round with disrespectful raps and
slaps, and it had now come to ventimore's right-hand neighbour, who
scrutinised it carefully, but made no bid.

"that's all _right_, you know," he whispered in horace's ear. "that's
good stuff, that is. if i was you, i'd _'ave_ that."

"seven shillings--eight--nine bid for it over there in the corner," said
the auctioneer.

"if you think it's so good, why don't you have it yourself?" horace
asked his neighbour.

"me? oh, well, it ain't exactly in my line, and getting this last lot
pretty near cleaned me out. i've done for to-day, i 'ave. all the same,
it is a curiosity; dunno as i've seen a brass vawse just that shape
before, and it's genuine old, though all these fellers are too ignorant
to know the value of it. so i don't mind giving you the tip."

horace rose, the better to examine the top. as far as he could make out
in the flickering light of one of the gas-stars, which the auctioneer
had just ordered to be lit, there were half-erased scratches and
triangular marks on the cap that might possibly be an inscription. if
so, might there not be the means here of regaining the professor's
favour, which he felt that, as it was, he should probably forfeit,
justly or not, by his ill-success?

he could hardly spend the professor's money on it, since it was not in
the catalogue, and he had no authority to bid for it, but he had a few
shillings of his own to spare. why not bid for it on his own account as
long as he could afford to do so? if he were outbid, as usual, it would
not particularly matter.

"thirteen shillings," the auctioneer was saying, in his dispassionate
tones. horace caught his eye, and slightly raised his catalogue, while
another man nodded at the same time. "fourteen in two places." horace
raised his catalogue again. "i won't go beyond fifteen," he thought.

"fifteen. it's _against_ you, sir. any advance on fifteen? sixteen--this
very quaint old oriental bottle going for only sixteen shillings.

"after all," thought horace, "i don't mind anything under a pound for
it." and he bid seventeen shillings. "eighteen," cried his rival, a
short, cheery, cherub-faced little dealer, whose neighbours adjured him
to "sit quiet like a good little boy and not waste his pocket-money."

"nineteen!" said horace. "pound!" answered the cherubic man.

"a pound only bid for this grand brass vessel," said the auctioneer,
indifferently. "all done at a pound?"

horace thought another shilling or two would not ruin him, and nodded.

"a guinea. for the last time. you'll _lose_ it, sir," said the
auctioneer to the little man.

"go on, tommy. don't you be beat. spring another bob on it, tommy," his
friends advised him ironically; but tommy shook his head, with the air
of a man who knows when to draw the line. "one guinea--and that's not
half its value! gentleman on my left," said the auctioneer, more in
sorrow than in anger--and the brass bottle became ventimore's property.

he paid for it, and, since he could hardly walk home nursing a large
metal bottle without attracting an inconvenient amount of attention,
directed that it should be sent to his lodgings at vincent square.

but when he was out in the fresh air, walking westward to his club, he
found himself wondering more and more what could have possessed him to
throw away a guinea--when he had few enough for legitimate expenses--on
an article of such exceedingly problematical value.

chapter iii

an unexpected opening

ventimore made his way to cottesmore gardens that evening in a highly
inconsistent, not to say chaotic, state of mind. the thought that he
would presently see sylvia again made his blood course quicker, while he
was fully determined to say no more to her than civility demanded.

at one moment he was blessing professor futvoye for his happy thought in
making use of him; at another he was bitterly recognising that it would
have been better for his peace of mind if he had been left alone. sylvia
and her mother had no desire to see more of him; if they had, they would
have asked him to come before this. no doubt they would tolerate him now
for the professor's sake; but who would not rather be ignored than
tolerated?

the more often he saw sylvia the more she would make his heart ache with
vain longing--whereas he was getting almost reconciled to her
indifference; he would very soon be cured if he didn't see her.

why _should_ he see her? he need not go in at all. he had merely to
leave the catalogue with his compliments, and the professor would learn
all he wanted to know.

on second thoughts he must go in--if only to return the bank-note. but
he would ask to see the professor in private. most probably he would not
be invited to join his wife and daughter, but if he were, he could make
some excuse. they might think it a little odd--a little discourteous,
perhaps; but they would be too relieved to care much about that.

when he got to cottesmore gardens, and was actually at the door of the
futvoyes' house, one of the neatest and demurest in that retired and
irreproachable quarter, he began to feel a craven hope that the
professor might be out, in which case he need only leave the catalogue
and write a letter when he got home, reporting his non-success at the
sale, and returning the note.

and, as it happened, the professor _was_ out, and horace was not so glad
as he thought he should be. the maid told him that the ladies were in
the drawing-room, and seemed to take it for granted that he was coming
in, so he had himself announced. he would not stay long--just long
enough to explain his business there, and make it clear that he had no
wish to force his acquaintance upon them. he found mrs. futvoye in the
farther part of the pretty double drawing-room, writing letters, and
sylvia, more dazzlingly fair than ever in some sort of gauzy black frock
with a heliotrope sash and a bunch of parma violets on her breast, was
comfortably established with a book in the front room, and seemed
surprised, if not resentful, at having to disturb herself.

"i must apologise," he began, with an involuntary stiffness, "for
calling at this very unceremonious time; but the fact is, the
professor"

"i know all about it," interrupted mrs. futvoye, brusquely, while her
shrewd, light-grey eyes took him in with a cool stare that was
humorously observant without being aggressive. "we heard how shamefully
my husband abused your good-nature. really, it was too bad of him to ask
a busy man like you to put aside his work and go and spend a whole day
at that stupid auction!"

"oh, i'd nothing particular to do. i can't call myself a busy
man--unfortunately," said horace, with that frankness which scorns to
conceal what other people know perfectly well already.

"ah, well, it's very nice of you to make light of it; but he ought not
to have done it--after so short an acquaintance, too. and to make it
worse, he has had to go out unexpectedly this evening, but he'll be back
before very long if you don't mind waiting."

"there's really no need to wait," said horace, "because this catalogue
will tell him everything, and, as the particular things he wanted went
for much more than he thought, i wasn't able to get any of them."

"i'm sure i'm very glad of it," said mrs. futvoye, "for his study is
crammed with odds and ends as it is, and i don't want the whole house to
look like a museum or an antiquity shop. i'd all the trouble in the
world to persuade him that a great gaudy gilded mummy-case was not quite
the thing for a drawing-room. but, please sit down, mr. ventimore."

"thanks," stammered horace, "but--but i mustn't stay. if you will tell
the professor how sorry i was to miss him, and--and give him back this
note which he left with me to cover any deposit, i--i won't interrupt
you any longer."

he was, as a rule, imperturbable in most social emergencies, but just
now he was seized with a wild desire to escape, which, to his infinite
mortification, made him behave like a shy schoolboy.

"nonsense!" said mrs. futvoye; "i am sure my husband would be most
annoyed if we didn't keep you till he came."

"i really ought to go," he declared, wistfully enough.

"we mustn't tease mr. ventimore to stay, mother, when he so evidently
wants to go," said sylvia, cruelly.

"well, i won't detain you--at least, not long. i wonder if you would
mind posting a letter for me as you pass the pillar-box? i've almost
finished it, and it ought to go to-night, and my maid jessie has such a
bad cold i really don't like sending her out with it."

it would have been impossible to refuse to stay after that--even if he
had wished. it would only be for a few minutes. sylvia might spare him
that much of her time. he should not trouble her again. so mrs. futvoye
went back to her bureau, and sylvia and he were practically alone.

she had taken a seat not far from his, and made a few constrained
remarks, obviously out of sheer civility. he returned mechanical
replies, with a dreary wonder whether this could really be the girl who
had talked to him with such charming friendliness and confidence only a
few weeks ago in normandy.

and the worst of it was, she was looking more bewitching than ever; her
slim arms gleaming through the black lace of her sleeves, and the gold
threads in her soft masses of chestnut hair sparkling in the light of
the shaded lamp behind her. the slight contraction of her eyebrows and
the mutinous downward curve of her mouth seemed expressive of boredom.

"what a dreadfully long time mamma is over that letter!" she said at
last. "i think i'd better go and hurry her up."

"please don't--unless you are particularly anxious to get rid of me."

"i thought you seemed particularly anxious to escape," she said coldly.
"and, as a family, we have certainly taken up quite enough of your time
for one day."

"that is not the way you used to talk at st. luc!" he said.

"at st. luc? perhaps not. but in london everything is so different, you
see."

"very different."

"when one meets people abroad who--who seem at all inclined to be
sociable," she continued, "one is so apt to think them pleasanter than
they really are. then one meets them again, and--and wonders what one
ever saw to like in them. and it's no use pretending one feels the same,
because they generally understand sooner or later. don't you find that?"

"i do, indeed," he said, wincing, "though i don't know what i've done to
deserve that you should tell me so!"

"oh, i was not blaming you. you have been most angelic. i can't think
how papa could have expected you to take all that trouble for
him--still, you did, though you must have simply hated it."

"but, good heavens! don't you know i should be only too delighted to be
of the least service to him--or to any of you?"

"you looked anything but delighted when you came in just now; you looked
as if your one idea was to get it over as soon as you could. you know
perfectly well you're longing now for mother to finish her letter and
set you free. do you really think i can't see that?"

"if all that is true, or partly true," said horace, "can't you guess
why?"

"i guessed how it was when you called here first that afternoon. mamma
had asked you to, and you thought you might as well be civil; perhaps
you really did think it would be pleasant to see us again--but it wasn't
the same thing. oh, i saw it in your face directly--you became
conventional and distant and horrid, and it made me horrid too; and you
went away determined that you wouldn't see any more of us than you could
help. that's why i was so furious when i heard that papa had been to see
you, and with such an object."

all this was so near the truth, and yet missed it with such perverse
ingenuity, that horace felt bound to put himself right.

"perhaps i ought to leave things as they are," he said, "but i can't.
it's no earthly use, i know; but may i tell you why it really was
painful to me to meet you again? i thought _you_ were changed, that you
wished to forget, and wished me to forget--only i can't--that we had
been friends for a short time. and though i never blamed you--it was
natural enough--it hit me pretty hard--so hard that i didn't feel
anxious to repeat the experience."

"did it hit you hard?" said sylvia, softly. "perhaps i minded too, just
a very little. however," she added, with a sudden smile, that made two
enchanting dimples in her cheeks, "it only shows how much more sensible
it is to have things out. _now_ perhaps you won't persist in keeping
away from us?"

"i believe," said horace, gloomily, still determined not to let any
direct avowal pass his lips, "it would be best that i _should_ keep
away."

her half-closed eyes shone through their long lashes; the violets on her
breast rose and fell. "i don't think i understand," she said, in a tone
that was both hurt and offended.

there is a pleasure in yielding to some temptations that more than
compensates for the pain of any previous resistance. come what might, he
was not going to be misunderstood any longer.

"if i must tell you," he said, "i've fallen desperately, hopelessly, in
love with you. now you know the reason."

"it doesn't seem a very good reason for wanting to go away and never see
me again. _does_ it?"

"not when i've no right to speak to you of love?"

"but you've done that!"

"i know," he said penitently; "i couldn't help it. but i never meant to.
it slipped out. i quite understand how hopeless it is."

"of course, if you are so sure as all that, you are quite right not to
try."

"sylvia! you can't mean that--that you do care, after all?"

"didn't you really see?" she said, with a low, happy laugh. "how stupid
of you! and how dear!"

he caught her hand, which she allowed to rest contentedly in his. "oh,
sylvia! then you do--you do! but, my god, what a selfish brute i am! for
we can't marry. it may be years before i can ask you to come to me. you
father and mother wouldn't hear of your being engaged to me."

"_need_ they hear of it just yet, horace?"

"yes, they must. i should feel a cur if i didn't tell your mother, at
all events."

"then you shan't feel a cur, for we'll go and tell her together." and
sylvia rose and went into the farther room, and put her arms round her
mother's neck. "mother darling," she said, in a half whisper, "it's
really all your fault for writing such very long letters, but--but--we
don't exactly know how we came to do it--but horace and i have got
engaged somehow. you aren't _very_ angry, are you?"

"i think you're both extremely foolish," said mrs. futvoye, as she
extricated herself from sylvia's arms and turned to face horace. "from
all i hear, mr. ventimore, you're not in a position to marry at
present."

"unfortunately, no" said horace; "i'm making nothing as yet. but my
chance must come some day. i don't ask you to give me sylvia till then."

"and you know you like horace, mother!" pleaded sylvia. "and i'm ready
to wait for him, any time. nothing will induce me to give him up, and i
shall never, never care for anybody else. so you see you may just as
well give us your consent!"

"i'm afraid i've been to blame," said mrs. futvoye. "i ought to have
foreseen this at st. luc. sylvia is our only child, mr. ventimore, and i
would far rather see her happily married than making what is called a
'grand match.' still, this really does seem _rather_ hopeless. i am
quite sure her father would never approve of it. indeed, it must not be
mentioned to him--he would only be irritated."

"so long as you are not against us," said horace, "you won't forbid me
to see her?"

"i believe i ought to," said mrs. futvoye; "but i don't object to your
coming here occasionally, as an ordinary visitor. only understand
this--until you can prove to my husband's satisfaction that you are able
to support sylvia in the manner she has been accustomed to, there must
be no formal engagement. i think i am entitled to ask _that_ of you."

she was so clearly within her rights, and so much more indulgent than
horace had expected--for he had always considered her an unsentimental
and rather worldly woman--that he accepted her conditions almost
gratefully. after all, it was enough for him that sylvia returned his
love, and that he should be allowed to see her from time to time.

"it's rather a pity," said sylvia, meditatively, a little later, when
her mother had gone back to her letter-writing, and she and horace were
discussing the future; "it's rather a pity that you didn't manage to get
_something_ at that sale. it might have helped you with papa."

"well, i did get something on my own account," he said, "though i don't
know whether it is likely to do me any good with your father." and he
told her how he had come to acquire the brass bottle.

"and you actually gave a guinea for it?" said sylvia, "when you could
probably get exactly the same thing, only better, at liberty's for about
seven-and-sixpence! nothing of that sort has any charms for papa, unless
it's dirty and dingy and centuries old."

"this looks all that. i only bought it because, though it wasn't down on
the catalogue, i had a fancy that it might interest the professor."

"oh!" cried sylvia, clasping her pretty hands, "if only it does, horace!
if it turns out to be tremendously rare and valuable! i do believe dad
would be so delighted that he'd consent to anything. ah, that's his step
outside ... he's letting himself in. now mind you don't forget to tell
him about that bottle."

the professor did not seem in the sweetest of humours as he entered the
drawing-room. "sorry i was obliged to be from home, and there was nobody
but my wife and daughter here to entertain you. but i am glad you
stayed--yes, i'm rather glad you stayed."

"so am i, sir," said horace, and proceeded to give his account of the
sale, which did not serve to improve the professor's temper. he thrust
out his under lip at certain items in the catalogue. "i wish i'd gone
myself," he said; "that bowl, a really fine example of sixteenth-century
persian work, going for only five guineas! i'd willingly have given ten
for it. there, there, i thought i could have depended on you to use your
judgment better than that!"

"if you remember, sir, you strictly limited me to the sums you marked."

"nothing of the sort," said the professor, testily; "my marginal notes
were merely intended as indications, no more. you might have known that
if you had secured one of the things at any price i should have
approved."

horace had no grounds for knowing anything of the kind, and much reason
for believing the contrary, but he saw no use in arguing the matter
further, and merely said he was sorry to have misunderstood.

"no doubt the fault was mine," said the professor, in a tone that
implied the opposite. "still, making every allowance for inexperience in
these matters, i should have thought it impossible for any one to spend
a whole day bidding at a place like hammond's without even securing a
single article."

"but, dad," put in sylvia, "mr. ventimore did get _one_ thing--on his
own account. it's a brass bottle, not down in the catalogue, but he
thinks it may be worth something perhaps. and he'd very much like to
have your opinion."

"tchah!" said the professor. "some modern bazaar work, most probably.
he'd better have kept his money. what was this bottle of yours like,
now, eh?"

horace described it.

"h'm. seems to be what the arabs call a 'kum-kum,' probably used as a
sprinkler, or to hold rose-water. hundreds of 'em about," commented the
professor, crustily.

"it had a lid, riveted or soldered on," said horace; "the general shape
was something like this ..." and he made a rapid sketch from memory,
which the professor took reluctantly, and then adjusted his glasses with
some increase of interest.

"ha--the form is antique, certainly. and the top hermetically fastened,
eh? that looks as if it might contain something."

"you don't think it has a genie inside, like the sealed jar the
fisherman found in the 'arabian nights'?" cried sylvia. "what fun if it
had!"

"by genie, i presume you mean a _jinnee_, which is the more correct and
scholarly term," said the professor. "female, _jinneeyeh_, and plural
_jinn_. no, i do _not_ contemplate that as a probable contingency. but
it is not quite impossible that a vessel closed as mr. ventimore
describes may have been designed as a receptacle for papyri or other
records of archæological interest, which may be still in preservation. i
should recommend you, sir, to use the greatest precaution in removing
the lid--don't expose the documents, if any, too suddenly to the outer
air, and it would be better if you did not handle them yourself. i shall
be rather curious to hear whether it really does contain anything, and
if so, what."

"i will open it as carefully as possible," said horace, "and whatever it
may contain, you may rely upon my letting you know at once."

he left shortly afterwards, encouraged by the radiant trust in sylvia's
eyes, and thrilled by the secret pressure of her hand at parting.

he had been amply repaid for all the hours he had spent in the close
sale-room. his luck had turned at last: he was going to succeed; he felt
it in the air, as if he were already fanned by fortune's pinions.

still thinking of sylvia, he let himself into the semi-detached,
old-fashioned house on the north side of vincent square, where he had
lodged for some years. it was nearly twelve o'clock, and his landlady,
mrs. rapkin, and her husband had already gone to bed.

ventimore went up to his sitting-room, a comfortable apartment with two
long windows opening on to a trellised verandah and balcony--a room
which, as he had furnished and decorated it himself to suit his own
tastes, had none of the depressing ugliness of typical lodgings.

it was quite dark, for the season was too mild for a fire, and he had to
grope for the matches before he could light his lamp. after he had done
so and turned up the wicks, the first object he saw was the bulbous,
long-necked jar which he had bought that afternoon, and which now stood
on the stained boards near the mantelpiece. it had been delivered with
unusual promptitude!

somehow he felt a sort of repulsion at the sight of it. "it's a
beastlier-looking object than i thought," he said to himself
disgustedly. "a chimney-pot would be about as decorative and appropriate
in my room. what a thundering ass i was to waste a guinea on it! i
wonder if there really is anything inside it. it is so infernally ugly
that it _ought_ to be useful. the professor seemed to fancy it might
hold documents, and he ought to know. anyway, i'll find out before i
turn in."

he grasped it by its long, thick neck, and tried to twist the cap off;
but it remained firm, which was not surprising, seeing that it was
thickly coated with a lava-like crust.

"i must get some of that off first, and then try again," he decided; and
after foraging downstairs, he returned with a hammer and chisel, with
which he chipped away the crust till the line of the cap was revealed,
and an uncouth metal knob that seemed to be a catch.

this he tapped sharply for some time, and again attempted to wrench off
the lid. then he gripped the vessel between his knees and put forth all
his strength, while the bottle seemed to rock and heave under him in
sympathy. the cap was beginning to give way, very slightly; one last
wrench--and it came off in his hand with such suddenness that he was
flung violently backwards, and hit the back of his head smartly against
an angle of the wainscot.

he had a vague impression of the bottle lying on its side, with dense
volumes of hissing, black smoke pouring out of its mouth and towering up
in a gigantic column to the ceiling; he was conscious, too, of a pungent
and peculiarly overpowering perfume. "i've got hold of some sort of
infernal machine," he thought, "and i shall be all over the square in
less than a second!" and, just as he arrived at this cheerful
conclusion, he lost consciousness altogether.

he could not have been unconscious for more than a few seconds, for when
he opened his eyes the room was still thick with smoke, through which he
dimly discerned the figure of a stranger, who seemed of abnormal and
almost colossal height. but this must have been an optical illusion
caused by the magnifying effects of the smoke; for, as it cleared, his
visitor proved to be of no more than ordinary stature. he was elderly,
and, indeed, venerable of appearance, and wore an eastern robe and
head-dress of a dark-green hue. he stood there with uplifted hands,
uttering something in a loud tone and a language unknown to horace.

ventimore, being still somewhat dazed, felt no surprise at seeing him.
mrs. rapkin must have let her second floor at last--to some oriental. he
would have preferred an englishman as a fellow-lodger, but this
foreigner must have noticed the smoke and rushed in to offer assistance,
which was both neighbourly and plucky of him.

"awfully good of you to come in, sir," he said, as he scrambled to his
feet. "i don't know what's happened exactly, but there's no harm done.
i'm only a trifle shaken, that's all. by the way, i suppose you can
speak english?"

"assuredly i can speak so as to be understood by all whom i address,"
answered the stranger.

"dost thou not understand my speech?"

"perfectly, now," said horace. "but you made a remark just now which i
didn't follow--would you mind repeating it?"

"i said: 'repentance, o prophet of god! i will not return to the like
conduct ever.'"

"ah," said horace. "i dare say you _were_ rather startled. so was i when
i opened that bottle."

"tell me--was it indeed thy hand that removed the seal, o young man of
kindness and good works?"

"i certainly did open it," said ventimore, "though i don't know where
the kindness comes in--for i've no notion what was inside the thing."

"i was inside it," said the stranger, calmly.

chapter iv

at large

"so _you_ were inside that bottle, were you?" said horace, blandly. "how
singular!" he began to realise that he had to deal with an oriental
lunatic, and must humour him to some extent. fortunately he did not seem
at all dangerous, though undeniably eccentric-looking. his hair fell in
disorderly profusion from under his high turban about his cheeks, which
were of a uniform pale rhubarb tint; his grey beard streamed out in
three thin strands, and his long, narrow eyes, opal in hue, and set
rather wide apart and at a slight angle, had a curious expression, part
slyness and part childlike simplicity.

"dost thou doubt that i speak truth? i tell thee that i have been
confined in that accursed vessel for countless centuries--how long, i
know not, for it is beyond calculation."

"i should hardly have thought from your appearance, sir, that you had
been so many years in bottle as all that," said horace, politely, "but
it's certainly time you had a change. may i, if it isn't indiscreet, ask
how you came into such a very uncomfortable position? but probably you
have forgotten by this time."

"forgotten!" said the other, with a sombre red glow in his opal eyes.
"wisely was it written: 'let him that desireth oblivion confer
benefits--but the memory of an injury endureth for ever.' _i_ forget
neither benefits nor injuries."

"an old gentleman with a grievance," thought ventimore. "and mad into
the bargain. nice person to have staying in the same house with one!"

"know, o best of mankind," continued the stranger, "that he who now
addresses thee is fakrash-el-aamash, one of the green jinn. and i dwelt
in the palace of the mountain of the clouds above the city of babel in
the garden of irem, which thou doubtless knowest by repute?"

"i fancy i _have_ heard of it," said horace, as if it were an address in
the court directory. "delightful neighbourhood."

"i had a kinswoman, bedeea-el-jemal, who possessed incomparable beauty
and manifold accomplishments. and seeing that, though a jinneeyeh, she
was of the believing jinn, i despatched messengers to suleyman the
great, the son of daood, offering him her hand in marriage. but a
certain jarjarees, the son of rejmoos, the son of iblees--may he be for
ever accursed!--looked with favour upon the maiden, and, going secretly
unto suleyman, persuaded him that i was preparing a crafty snare for the
king's undoing."

"and, of course, _you_ never thought of such a thing?" said ventimore.

"by a venomous tongue the fairest motives may be rendered foul," was the
somewhat evasive reply. "thus it came to pass that suleyman--on whom be
peace!--listened unto the voice of jarjarees and refused to receive the
maiden. moreover, he commanded that i should be seized and imprisoned in
a bottle of brass and cast into the sea of el-karkar, there to abide the
day of doom."

"too bad--really too bad!" murmured horace, in a tone that he could only
hope was sufficiently sympathetic.

"but now, by thy means, o thou of noble ancestors and gentle
disposition, my deliverance hath been accomplished; and if i were to
serve thee for a thousand years, regarding nothing else, even thus could
i not requite thee, and my so doing would be a small thing according to
thy desserts!"

"pray don't mention it," said horace; "only too pleased if i've been of
any use to you."

"in the sky it is written upon the pages of the air: 'he who doth kind
actions shall experience the like.' am i not an efreet of the jinn?
demand, therefore, and thou shalt receive."

"poor old chap!" thought horace, "he's very cracked indeed. he'll be
wanting to give me a present of some sort soon--and of course i can't
have that.... my dear mr. fakrash," he said aloud, "i've done
nothing--nothing at all--and if i had, i couldn't possibly accept any
reward for it."

"what are thy names, and what calling dost thou follow?"

"i ought to have introduced myself before--let me give you my card;" and
ventimore gave him one, which the other took and placed in his girdle.
"that's my business address. i'm an architect, if you know what that
is--a man who builds houses and churches--mosques, you know--in fact,
anything, when he can get it to build."

"a useful calling indeed--and one to be rewarded with fine gold."

"in my case," horace confessed, "the reward has been too fine to be
perceived. in other words, i've never _been_ rewarded, because i've
never yet had the luck to get a client."

"and what is this client of whom thou speakest?"

"oh, well, some well-to-do merchant who wants a house built for him and
doesn't care how much he spends on it. there must be lots of them
about--but they never seem to come in _my_ direction."

"grant me a period of delay, and, if it be possible, i will procure thee
such a client."

horace could not help thinking that any recommendation from such a
quarter would hardly carry much weight; but, as the poor old man
evidently imagined himself under an obligation, which he was anxious to
discharge, it would have been unkind to throw cold water on his good
intentions.

"my dear sir," he said lightly, "if you _should_ come across that
particular type of client, and can contrive to impress him with the
belief that i'm just the architect he's looking out for--which, between
ourselves, i am, though nobody's discovered it yet--if you can get him
to come to me, you will do me the very greatest service i could ever
hope for. but don't give yourself any trouble over it."

"it will be one of the easiest things that can be," said his visitor,
"that is" (and here a shade of rather pathetic doubt crossed his face)
"provided that anything of my former power yet remains unto me."

"well, never mind, sir," said horace; "if you can't, i shall take the
will for the deed."

"first of all, it will be prudent to learn where suleyman is, that i may
humble myself before him and make my peace."

"yes," said horace, gently, "i would. i should make a point of that,
sir. not _now_, you know. he might be in bed. to-morrow morning."

"this is a strange place that i am in, and i know not yet in what
direction i should seek him. but till i have found him, and justified
myself in his sight, and had my revenge upon jarjarees, mine enemy, i
shall know no rest."

"well, but go to bed now, like a sensible old chap," said horace,
soothingly, anxious to prevent this poor demented asiatic from falling
into the hands of the police. "plenty of time to go and call on suleyman
to-morrow."

"i will search for him, even unto the uttermost ends of the earth!"

"that's right--you're sure to find him in one of them. only, don't you
see, it's no use starting to-night--the last trains have gone long ago."
as he spoke, the night wind bore across the square the sound of big ben
striking the quarters in westminster clock tower, and then, after a
pause, the solemn boom that announced the first of the small hours.
"to-morrow," thought ventimore, "i'll speak to mrs. rapkin, and get her
to send for a doctor and have him put under proper care--the poor old
boy really isn't fit to go about alone!"

"i will start now--at once," insisted the stranger "for there is no time
to be lost."

"oh, come!" said horace, "after so many thousand years, a few hours more
or less won't make any serious difference. and you _can't_ go out
now--they've shut up the house. do let me take you upstairs to your
room, sir."

"not so, for i must leave thee for a season, o young man of kind
conduct. but may thy days be fortunate, and the gate never cease to be
repaired, and the nose of him that envieth thee be rubbed in the dust,
for love for thee hath entered into my heart, and if it be permitted
unto me, i will cover thee with the veils of my protection!"

as he finished this harangue the speaker seemed, to ventimore's
speechless amazement, to slip through the wall behind him. at all
events, he had left the room somehow--and horace found himself alone.

he rubbed the back of his head, which began to be painful. "he can't
really have vanished through the wall," he said to himself. "that's too
absurd. the fact is, i'm over-excited this evening--and no wonder, after
all that's happened. the best thing i can do is to go to bed at once."

which he accordingly proceeded to do.

chapter v

carte blanche

when ventimore woke next morning his headache had gone, and with it the
recollection of everything but the wondrous and delightful fact that
sylvia loved him and had promised to be his some day. her mother, too,
was on his side; why should he despair of anything after that? there was
the professor, to be sure--but even he might be brought to consent to an
engagement, especially if it turned out that the brass bottle ... and
here horace began to recall an extraordinary dream in connection with
that extremely speculative purchase of his. he had dreamed that he had
forced the bottle open, and that it proved to contain, not manuscripts,
but an elderly jinnee who alleged that he had been imprisoned there by
the order of king solomon!

what, he wondered, could have put so grotesque a fancy into his head?
and then he smiled as he traced it to sylvia's playful suggestion that
the bottle might contain a "genie," as did the famous jar in the
"arabian nights," and to her father's pedantic correction of the word to
"jinnee." upon that slight foundation his sleeping brain had built up
all that elaborate fabric--a scene so vivid and a story so
circumstantial and plausible that, in spite of its extravagance, he
could hardly even now persuade himself that it was entirely imaginary.
the psychology of dreams is a subject which has a fascinating mystery,
even for the least serious student.

as he entered the sitting-room, where his breakfast awaited him, he
looked round, half expecting to find the bottle lying with its lid off
in the corner, as he had last seen it in his dream.

of course, it was not there, and he felt an odd relief. the
auction-room people had not delivered it yet, and so much the better,
for he had still to ascertain if it had anything inside it; and who knew
that it might not contain something more to his advantage than a
maundering old jinnee with a grievance several thousands of years old?

breakfast over, he rang for his landlady, who presently appeared. mrs.
rapkin was a superior type of her much-abused class. she was
scrupulously clean and neat in her person; her sandy hair was so smooth
and tightly knotted that it gave her head the colour and shape of a
barcelona nut; she had sharp, beady eyes, nostrils that seemed to smell
battle afar off, a wide, thin mouth that apparently closed with a snap,
and a dry, whity-brown complexion suggestive of bran.

but if somewhat grim of aspect, she was a good soul and devoted to
horace, in whom she took almost a maternal interest, while regretting
that he was not what she called "serious-minded enough" to get on in the
world. rapkin had wooed and married her when they were both in service,
and he still took occasional jobs as an outdoor butler, though horace
suspected that his more staple form of industry was the consumption of
gin-and-water and remarkably full-flavoured cigars in the basement
parlour.

"shall you be dining in this evening, sir?" inquired mrs. rapkin.

"i don't know. don't get anything in for me; i shall most probably dine
at the club," said horace; and mrs. rapkin, who had a confirmed belief
that all clubs were hotbeds of vice and extravagance, sniffed
disapproval. "by the way," he added, "if a kind of brass pot is sent
here, it's all right. i bought it at a sale yesterday. be careful how
you handle it--it's rather old."

"there _was_ a vawse come late last night, sir; i don't know if it's
that, it's old-fashioned enough."

"then will you bring it up at once, please? i want to see it."

mrs. rapkin retired, to reappear presently with the brass bottle. "i
thought you'd have noticed it when you come in last night, sir," she
explained, "for i stood it in the corner, and when i see it this morning
it was layin' o' one side and looking that dirty and disrespectable i
took it down to give it a good clean, which it wanted it."

it certainly looked rather the better for it, and the marks or scratches
on the cap were more distinguishable, but horace was somewhat
disconcerted to find that part of his dream was true--the bottle had
been there.

"i hope i've done nothing wrong," said mrs. rapkin, observing his
expression; "i only used a little warm ale to it, which is a capital
thing for brass-work, and gave it a scrub with 'vitrolia' soap--but it
would take more than that to get all the muck off of it."

"it is all right, so long as you didn't try to get the top off," said
horace.

"why, the top _was_ off it, sir. i thought you'd done it with the 'ammer
and chisel when you got 'ome," said his landlady, staring. "i found them
'ere on the carpet."

horace started. then _that_ part was true, too! "oh, ah," he said, "i
believe i did. i'd forgotten. that reminds me. haven't you let the room
above to--to an oriental gentleman--a native, you know--wears a green
turban?"

"that i most certainly 'ave _not_, mr. ventimore," said mrs. rapkin,
with emphasis, "nor wouldn't. not if his turbin was all the colours of
the rainbow--for i don't 'old with such. why, there was rapkin's own
sister-in-law let her parlour floor to a horiental--a parsee _he_ was,
or _one_ o' them hafrican tribes--and reason she 'ad to repent of it,
for all his gold spectacles! whatever made you fancy i should let to a
blackamoor?"

"oh, i thought i saw somebody about--er--answering that description,
and i wondered if"

"never in _this_ 'ouse, sir. mrs. steggars, next door but one, might let
to such, for all i can say to the contrary, not being what you might
call particular, and her rooms more suitable to savage notions--but i've
enough on _my_ hands, mr. ventimore, attending to you--not keeping a
girl to do the waiting, as why should i while i'm well able to do it
better myself?"

as soon as she relieved him of her presence, he examined the bottle:
there was nothing whatever inside it, which disposed of all the hopes he
had entertained from that quarter.

it was not difficult to account for the visionary oriental as an
hallucination probably inspired by the heavy fumes (for he now believed
in the fumes) which had doubtless resulted from the rapid decomposition
of some long-buried spices or similar substances suddenly exposed to the
air.

if any further explanation were needed, the accidental blow to the back
of his head, together with the latent suggestion from the "arabian
nights," would amply provide it.

so, having settled these points to his entire satisfaction, he went to
his office in great cloister street, which he now had entirely to
himself, and was soon engaged in drafting the specification for beevor
on which he had been working when so fortunately interrupted the day
before by the professor.

the work was more or less mechanical, and could bring him no credit and
little thanks, but horace had the happy faculty of doing thoroughly
whatever he undertook, and as he sat there by his wide-open window he
soon became entirely oblivious of all but the task before him.

so much so that, even when the light became obscured for a moment, as if
by some large and opaque body in passing, he did not look up
immediately, and, when he did, was surprised to find the only armchair
occupied by a portly person, who seemed to be trying to recover his
breath.

"i beg your pardon," said ventimore; "i never heard you come in."

his visitor could only wave his head in courteous deprecation, under
which there seemed a suspicion of bewildered embarrassment. he was a
rosy-gilled, spotlessly clean, elderly gentleman, with white whiskers;
his eyes, just then slightly protuberant, were shrewd, but genial; he
had a wide, jolly mouth and a double chin. he was dressed like a man who
is above disguising his prosperity; he wore a large, pear-shaped pearl
in his crimson scarf, and had probably only lately discarded his summer
white hat and white waistcoat.

"my dear sir," he began, in a rich, throaty voice, as soon as he could
speak; "my dear sir, you must think this is a most unceremonious way
of--ah!--dropping in on you--of invading your privacy."

"not at all," said horace, wondering whether he could possibly intend
him to understand that he had come in by the window. "i'm afraid there
was no one to show you in--my clerk is away just now."

"no matter, sir, no matter. i found my way up, as you perceive. the
important, i may say the essential, fact is that i _am_ here."

"quite so," said horace, "and may i ask what brought you?"

"what brought" the stranger's eyes grew fish-like for the moment.
"allow me, i--i shall come to that--in good time. i am still a
little--as you can see." he glanced round the room. "you are, i think,
an architect, mr. ah--mr. um?"

"ventimore is my name," said horace, "and i _am_ an architect."

"ventimore, to be sure!" he put his hand in his pocket and produced a
card: "yes, it's all quite correct: i see i have the name here. and an
architect, mr. ventimore, so i--i am given to understand, of immense
ability."

"i'm afraid i can't claim to be that," said horace, "but i may call
myself fairly competent."

"competent? why, of _course_ you're competent. do you suppose, sir, that
i, a practical business man, should come to any one who was _not_
competent?" he said, with exactly the air of a man trying to convince
himself--against his own judgment--that he was acting with the utmost
prudence.

"am i to understand that some one has been good enough to recommend me
to you?" inquired horace.

"certainly not, sir, certainly not. _i_ need no recommendation but my
own judgment. i--ah--have a tolerable acquaintance with all that is
going on in the art world, and i have come to the conclusion,
mr.--eh--ah--ventimore, i repeat, the deliberate and unassisted
conclusion, that you are the one man living who can do what i want."

"delighted to hear it," said horace, genuinely gratified. "when did you
see any of my designs?"

"never mind, sir. i don't decide without very good grounds. it
doesn't take me long to make up my mind, and when my mind is made
up, i act, sir, i act. and, to come to the point, i have a small
commission--unworthy, i am quite aware, of your--ah--distinguished
talent--which i should like to put in your hands."

"is _he_ going to ask me to attend a sale for him?" thought horace. "i'm
hanged if i do."

"i'm rather busy at present," he said dubiously, "as you may see. i'm
not sure whether"

"i'll put the matter in a nutshell, sir--in a nutshell. my name is
wackerbath, samuel wackerbath--tolerably well known, if i may say so, in
city circles." horace, of course, concealed the fact that his visitor's
name and fame were unfamiliar to him. "i've lately bought a few acres on
the hampshire border, near the house i'm living in just now; and i've
been thinking--as i was saying to a friend only just now, as we were
crossing westminster bridge--i've been thinking of building myself a
little place there, just a humble, unpretentious home, where i could run
down for the weekend and entertain a friend or two in a quiet way, and
perhaps live some part of the year. hitherto i've rented places as i
wanted 'em--old family seats and ancestral mansions and so forth: very
nice in their way, but i want to feel under a roof of my own. i want to
surround myself with the simple comforts, the--ah--unassuming elegance
of an english country home. and you're the man--i feel more convinced of
it with every word you say--you're the man to do the job in
style--ah--to execute the work as it should be done."

here was the long-wished-for client at last! and it was satisfactory to
feel that he had arrived in the most ordinary and commonplace course,
for no one could look at mr. samuel wackerbath and believe for a moment
that he was capable of floating through an upper window; he was not in
the least that kind of person.

"i shall be happy to do my best," said horace, with a calmness that
surprised himself. "could you give me some idea of the amount you are
prepared to spend?"

"well, i'm no croesus--though i won't say i'm a pauper precisely--and,
as i remarked before, i prefer comfort to splendour. i don't think i
should be justified in going beyond--well, say sixty thousand."

"sixty thousand!" exclaimed horace, who had expected about a tenth of
that sum. "oh, not _more_ than sixty thousand? i see."

"i mean, on the house itself," explained mr. wackerbath; "there will be
outbuildings, lodges, cottages, and so forth, and then some of the rooms
i should want specially decorated. altogether, before we are finished,
it may work out at about a hundred thousand. i take it that, with such a
margin, you could--ah--run me up something that in a modest way would
take the shine out of--i mean to say eclipse--anything in the adjoining
counties?"

"i certainly think," said horace, "that for such a sum as that i can
undertake that you shall have a home which will satisfy you." and he
proceeded to put the usual questions as to site, soil, available
building materials, the accommodation that would be required, and so on.

"you're young, sir," said mr. wackerbath, at the end of the interview,
"but i perceive you are up to all the tricks of the--i _should_ say,
versed in the _minutiæ_ of your profession. you would like to run down
and look at the ground, eh? well, that's only reasonable; and my wife
and daughters will want to have _their_ say in the matter--no getting on
without pleasing the ladies, hey? now, let me see. to-morrow's sunday.
why not come down by the 8.45 a.m. to lipsfield? i'll have a trap, or a
brougham and pair, or something, waiting for you--take you over the
ground myself, bring you back to lunch with us at oriel court, and talk
the whole thing thoroughly over. then we'll send you up to town in the
evening, and you can start work the first thing on monday. that suit
you? very well, then. we'll expect you to-morrow."

with this mr. wackerbath departed, leaving horace, as may be imagined,
absolutely overwhelmed by the suddenness and completeness of his good
fortune. he was no longer one of the unemployed: he had work to do, and,
better still, work that would interest him, give him all the scope and
opportunity he could wish for. with a client who seemed tractable, and
to whom money was clearly no object, he might carry out some of his most
ambitious ideas.

moreover, he would now be in a position to speak to sylvia's father
without fear of a repulse. his commission on £60,000 would be £3,000,
and that on the decorations and other work at least as much
again--probably more. in a year he could marry without imprudence; in
two or three years he might be making a handsome income, for he felt
confident that, with such a start, he would soon have as much work as he
could undertake.

he was ashamed of himself for ever having lost heart. what were the last
few years of weary waiting but probation and preparation for this
splendid chance, which had come just when he really needed it, and in
the most simple and natural manner?

he loyally completed the work he had promised to do for beevor, who
would have to dispense with his assistance in future, and then he felt
too excited and restless to stay in the office, and, after lunching at
his club as usual, he promised himself the pleasure of going to
cottesmore gardens and telling sylvia his good news.

it was still early, and he walked the whole way, as some vent for his
high spirits, enjoying everything with a new zest--the dappled grey and
salmon sky before him, the amber, russet, and yellow of the scanty
foliage in kensington gardens, the pungent scent of fallen chestnuts and
acorns and burning leaves, the blue-grey mist stealing between the
distant tree-trunks, and then the cheery bustle and brilliancy of the
high street. finally came the joy of finding sylvia all alone, and
witnessing her frank delight at what he had come to tell her, of feeling
her hands on his shoulders, and holding her in his arms, as their lips
met for the first time. if on that saturday afternoon there was a
happier man than horace ventimore, he would have done well to dissemble
his felicity, for fear of incurring the jealousy of the high gods.

when mrs. futvoye returned, as she did only too soon, to find her
daughter and horace seated on the same sofa, she did not pretend to be
gratified. "this is taking a most unfair advantage of what i was weak
enough to say last night, mr. ventimore," she began. "i thought i could
have trusted you!"

"i shouldn't have come so soon," he said, "if my position were what it
was only yesterday. but it's changed since then, and i venture to hope
that even the professor won't object now to our being regularly
engaged." and he told her of the sudden alteration in his prospects.

"well," said mrs. futvoye, "you had better speak to my husband about
it."

the professor came in shortly afterwards, and horace immediately
requested a few minutes' conversation with him in the study, which was
readily granted.

the study to which the professor led the way was built out at the back
of the house, and crowded with oriental curios of every age and kind;
the furniture had been made by cairene cabinet-makers, and along the
cornices of the book-cases were texts from the koran, while every chair
bore the arabic for "welcome" in a gilded firework on its leather back;
the lamp was a perforated mosque lantern with long pendent glass tubes
like hyacinth glasses; a mummy-case smiled from a corner with laboured
_bonhomie_.

"well," began the professor, as soon as they were seated, "so i was not
mistaken--there was something in the brass bottle after all, then? let's
have a look at it, whatever it is."

for the moment horace had almost forgotten the bottle. "oh!" he said,
"i--i got it open; but there was nothing in it."

"just as i anticipated, sir," said the professor. "i told you there
couldn't be anything in a bottle of that description; it was simply
throwing money away to buy it."

"i dare say it was, but i wished to speak to you on a much more
important matter;" and horace briefly explained his object.

"dear me," said the professor, rubbing up his hair irritably, "dear me!
i'd no idea of this--no idea at all. i was under the impression that you
volunteered to act as escort to my wife and daughter at st. luc purely
out of good nature to relieve me from what--to a man of my habits in
that extreme heat--would have been an arduous and distasteful duty."

"i was not wholly unselfish, i admit," said horace. "i fell in love with
your daughter, sir, the first day i met her--only i felt i had no right,
as a poor man with no prospects, to speak to her or you at that time."

"a very creditable feeling--but i've yet to learn why you should have
overcome it."

so, for the third time, ventimore told the story of the sudden turn in
his fortunes.

"i know this mr. samuel wackerbath by name," said the professor; "one of
the chief partners in the firm of akers and coverdale, the great estate
agents--a most influential man, if you can only succeed in satisfying
him."

"oh, i don't feel any misgivings about that, sir," said horace. "i mean
to build him a house that will be beyond his wildest expectations, and
you see that in a year i shall have earned several thousands, and i need
not say that i will make any settlement you think proper when i
marry"

"when you are in possession of those thousands," remarked the professor,
dryly, "it will be time enough to talk of marrying and making
settlements. meanwhile, if you and sylvia choose to consider yourselves
engaged, i won't object--only i must insist on having your promise that
you won't persuade her to marry you without her mother's and my
consent."

ventimore gave this undertaking willingly enough, and they returned to
the drawing-room. mrs. futvoye could hardly avoid asking horace, in his
new character of _fiancé_, to stay and dine, which it need not be said
he was only too delighted to do.

"there is one thing, my dear--er--horace," said the professor, solemnly,
after dinner, when the neat parlourmaid had left them at dessert, "one
thing on which i think it my duty to caution you. if you are to justify
the confidence we have shown in sanctioning your engagement to sylvia,
you must curb this propensity of yours to needless extravagance."

"papa!" cried sylvia. "what _could_ have made you think horace
extravagant?"

"really," said horace, "i shouldn't have called myself particularly so."

"nobody ever _does_ call himself particularly extravagant," retorted the
professor; "but i observed at st. luc that you habitually gave fifty
centimes as a _pourboire_ when twopence, or even a penny, would have
been handsome. and no one with any regard for the value of money would
have given a guinea for a worthless brass vessel on the bare chance that
it might contain manuscripts, which (as any one could have foreseen) it
did not."

"but it's not a bad sort of bottle, sir," pleaded horace. "if you
remember, you said yourself the shape was unusual. why shouldn't it be
worth all the money, and more?"

"to a collector, perhaps," said the professor, with his wonted
amiability, "which you are not. no, i can only call it a senseless and
reprehensible waste of money."

"well, the truth is," said horace, "i bought it with some idea that it
might interest _you_."

"then you were mistaken, sir. it does _not_ interest me. why should i be
interested in a metal jar which, for anything that appears to the
contrary, may have been cast the other day at birmingham?"

"but there _is_ something," said horace; "a seal or inscription of some
sort engraved on the cap. didn't i mention it?"

"you said nothing about an inscription before," replied the professor,
with rather more interest. "what is the character--arabic? persian?
kufic?"

"i really couldn't say--it's almost rubbed out--queer little triangular
marks, something like birds' footprints."

"that sounds like cuneiform," said the professor, "which would seem to
point to a phoenician origin. and, as i am acquainted with no oriental
brass earlier than the ninth century of our era, i should regard your
description as, _à priori_, distinctly unlikely. however, i should
certainly like to have an opportunity of examining the bottle for myself
some day."

"whenever you please, professor. when can you come?"

"why, i'm so much occupied all day that i can't say for certain when i
can get up to your office again."

"my own days will be fairly full now," said horace; "and the thing's not
at the office, but in my rooms at vincent square. why shouldn't you all
come and dine quietly there some evening next week, and then you could
examine the inscription comfortably afterwards, you know, professor, and
find out what it really is? do say you will." he was eager to have the
privilege of entertaining sylvia in his own rooms for the first time.

"no, no," said the professor; "i see no reason why you should be
troubled with the entire family. i may drop in alone some evening and
take the luck of the pot, sir."

"thank you, papa," put in sylvia; "but _i_ should like to come too,
please, and hear what you think of horace's bottle. and i'm dying to see
his rooms. i believe they're fearfully luxurious."

"i trust," observed her father, "that they are far indeed from answering
that description. if they did, i should consider it a most
unsatisfactory indication of horace's character."

"there's nothing magnificent about them, i assure you," said horace.
"though it's true i've had them done up, and all that sort of thing, at
my own expense--but quite simply. i couldn't afford to spend much on
them. but do come and see them. i must have a little dinner, to
celebrate my good fortune--it will be so jolly if you'll all three
come."

"if we do come," stipulated the professor, "it must be on the distinct
understanding that you don't provide an elaborate banquet. plain,
simple, wholesome food, well cooked, such as we have had this evening,
is all that is necessary. more would be ostentatious."

"my _dear_ dad!" protested sylvia, in distress at this somewhat
dictatorial speech. "surely you can leave all that to horace!"

"horace, my dear, understands that, in speaking as i did, i was simply
treating him as a potential member of my family." here sylvia made a
private little grimace. "no young man who contemplates marrying should
allow himself to launch into extravagance on the strength of prospects
which, for all he can tell," said the professor, genially, "may prove
fallacious. on the contrary, if his affection is sincere, he will incur
as little expense as possible, put by every penny he can save, rather
than subject the girl he professes to love to the ordeal of a long
engagement. in other words, the truest lover is the best economist."

"i quite understand, sir," said horace, good-temperedly; "it would be
foolish of me to attempt any ambitious form of entertainment--especially
as my landlady, though an excellent plain cook, is not exactly a _cordon
bleu_. so you can come to my modest board without misgivings."

before he left, a provisional date for the dinner was fixed for an
evening towards the end of the next week, and horace walked home,
treading on air rather than hard paving-stones, and "striking the stars
with his uplifted head."

the next day he went down to lipsfield and made the acquaintance of the
whole wackerbath family, who were all enthusiastic about the proposed
country house. the site was everything that the most exacting architect
could desire, and he came back to town the same evening, having spent a
pleasant day and learnt enough of his client's requirements, and--what
was even more important--those of his client's wife and daughters, to
enable him to begin work upon the sketch-plans the next morning.

he had not been long in his rooms at vincent square, and was still
agreeably engaged in recalling the docility and ready appreciation with
which the wackerbaths had received his suggestions and rough sketches,
their compliments and absolute confidence in his skill, when he had a
shock which was as disagreeable as it was certainly unexpected.

for the wall before him parted like a film, and through it stepped,
smiling benignantly, the green-robed figure of fakrash-el-aamash, the
jinnee.

chapter vi

embarras de richesses

ventimore had so thoroughly convinced himself that the released jinnee
was purely a creature of his own imagination, that he rubbed his eyes
with a start, hoping that they had deceived him.

"stroke thy head, o merciful and meritorious one," said his visitor,
"and recover thy faculties to receive good tidings. for it is indeed
i--fakrash-el-aamash--whom thou beholdest."

"i--i'm delighted to see you," said horace, as cordially as he could.
"is there anything i can do for you?"

"nay, for hast thou not done me the greatest of all services by setting
me free? to escape out of a bottle is pleasant. and to thee i owe my
deliverance."

it was all true, then: he had really let an imprisoned genius or jinnee,
or whatever it was, out of that bottle! he knew he could not be dreaming
now--he only wished he were. however, since it was done, his best course
seemed to be to put a good face on it, and persuade this uncanny being
somehow to go away and leave him in peace for the future.

"oh, that's all right, my dear sir," he said, "don't think any more
about it. i--i rather understood you to say that you were starting on a
journey in search of solomon?"

"i have been, and returned. for i visited sundry cities in his
dominions, hoping that by chance i might hear news of him, but i
refrained from asking directly lest thereby i should engender suspicion,
and so suleyman should learn of my escape before i could obtain an
audience of him and implore justice."

"oh, i shouldn't think that was likely," said horace. "if i were you, i
should go straight back and go on travelling till i _did_ find
suleyman."

"well was it said: 'pass not any door without knocking, lest haply that
which thou seekest should be behind it.'"

"exactly," said horace. "do each city thoroughly, house by house, and
don't neglect the smallest clue. 'if at first you don't succeed, try,
try, try, again!' as one of our own poets teaches."

"'try, try, try again,'" echoed the jinnee, with an admiration that was
almost fatuous. "divinely gifted truly was he who composed such a
verse!"

"he has a great reputation as a sage," said horace, "and the maxim is
considered one of his happiest efforts. don't you think that, as the
east is rather thickly populated, the less time you lose in following
the poet's recommendation the better?"

"it may be as thou sayest. but know this, o my son, that wheresoever i
may wander, i shall never cease to study how i may most fitly reward
thee for thy kindness towards me. for nobly it was said: 'if i be
possessed of wealth and be not liberal, may my head never be extended!'"

"my good sir," said horace, "do please understand that if you were to
offer me any reward for--for a very ordinary act of courtesy, i should
be obliged to decline it."

"but didst thou not say that thou wast sorely in need of a client?"

"that was so at the time," said horace; "but since i last had the
pleasure of seeing you, i have met with one who is all i could possibly
wish for."

"i am indeed rejoiced to hear it," returned the jinnee, "for thou
showest me that i have succeeded in performing the first service which
thou hast demanded of me."

horace staggered under this severe blow to his pride; for the moment he
could only gasp: "you--_you_ sent him to me?"

"i, and no other," said the jinnee, beaming with satisfaction; "for
while, unseen of men, i was circling in air, resolved to attend to thy
affair before beginning my search for suleyman (on whom be peace!), it
chanced that i overheard a human being of prosperous appearance say
aloud upon a bridge that he desired to erect for himself a palace if he
could but find an architect. so, perceiving thee afar off seated at an
open casement, i immediately transported him to the place and delivered
him into thy hands."

"but he knew my name--he had my card in his pocket," said horace.

"i furnished him with the paper containing thy names and abode, lest he
should be ignorant of them."

"well, look here, mr. fakrash," said the unfortunate horace, "i know you
meant well--but _never_ do a thing like that again! if my
brother-architects came to know of it i should be accused of most
unprofessional behaviour. i'd no idea you would take that way of
introducing a client to me, or i should have stopped it at once!"

"it was an error," said fakrash. "no matter. i will undo this affair,
and devise some other and better means of serving thee."

"no, no," he said, "for heaven's sake, leave things alone--you'll only
make them worse. forgive me, my dear mr. fakrash, i'm afraid i must seem
most ungrateful; but--but i was so taken by surprise. and really, i am
extremely obliged to you. for, though the means you took werewere a
little irregular, you have done me a very great service."

"it is naught," said the jinnee, "compared to those i hope to render so
great a benefactor."

"but, indeed, you mustn't think of trying to do any more for me," urged
horace, who felt the absolute necessity of expelling any scheme of
further benevolence from the jinnee's head once and for all. "you have
done enough. why, thanks to you, i am engaged to build a palace that
will keep me hard at work and happy for ever so long."

"are human beings, then, so enamoured of hard labour?" asked fakrash, in
wonder. "it is not thus with the jinn."

"i love my work for its own sake," said horace, "and then, when i have
finished it, i shall have earned a very fair amount of money--which is
particularly important to me just now."

"and why, my son, art thou so desirous of obtaining riches?"

"because," said horace, "unless a man is tolerably well off in these
days he cannot hope to marry."

fakrash smiled with indulgent compassion. "how excellent is the saying
of one of old: 'he that adventureth upon matrimony is like unto one who
thrusteth his hand into a sack containing many thousands of serpents and
one eel. yet, if fate so decree, he _may_ draw forth the eel.' and thou
art comely, and of an age when it is natural to desire the love of a
maiden. therefore be of good heart and a cheerful eye, and it may be
that, when i am more at leisure, i shall find thee a helpmate who shall
rejoice thy soul."

"please don't trouble to find me anything of the sort!" said horace,
hastily, with a mental vision of some helpless and scandalised stranger
being shot into his dwelling like coals. "i assure you i would much
rather win a wife for myself in the ordinary way--as, thanks to your
kindness, i have every hope of doing before long."

"is there already some damsel for whom thy heart pineth? if so, fear not
to tell me her names and dwelling place, and i will assuredly obtain her
for thee."

but ventimore had seen enough of the jinnee's oriental methods to doubt
his tact and discretion where sylvia was concerned. "no, no; of course
not. i spoke generally," he said. "it's exceedingly kind of you--but i
_do_ wish i could make you understand that i am overpaid as it is. you
have put me in the way to make a name and fortune for myself. if i fail,
it will be my own fault. and, at all events, i want nothing more from
you. if you mean to find suleyman (on whom be peace!) you must go and
live in the east altogether--for he certainly isn't over here; you must
give up your whole time to it, keep as quiet as possible, and don't be
discouraged by any reports you may hear. above all, never trouble your
head about me or my affairs again!"

"o thou of wisdom and eloquence," said fakrash, "this is most excellent
advice. i will go, then; but may i drink the cup of perdition if i
become unmindful of thy benevolence!"

and, raising his joined hands above his head as he spoke, he sank, feet
foremost, through the carpet and was gone.

"thank heaven," thought ventimore, "he's taken the hint at last. i don't
think i'm likely to see any more of him. i feel an ungrateful brute for
saying so, but i can't help it. i can _not_ stand being under any
obligation to a jinnee who's been shut up in a beastly brass bottle ever
since the days of solomon, who probably had very good reasons for
putting him there."

horace next asked himself whether he was bound in honour to disclose the
facts to mr. wackerbath, and give him the opportunity of withdrawing
from the agreement if he thought fit.

on the whole, he saw no necessity for telling him anything; the only
possible result would be to make his client suspect his sanity; and who
would care to employ an insane architect? then, if he retired from the
undertaking without any explanations, what could he say to sylvia? what
would sylvia's father say to _him_? there would certainly be an end to
his engagement.

after all, he had not been to blame; the wackerbaths were quite
satisfied. he felt perfectly sure that he could justify their selection
of him; he would wrong nobody by accepting the commission, while he
would only offend them, injure himself irretrievably, and lose all hope
of gaining sylvia if he made any attempt to undeceive them.

and fakrash was gone, never to return. so, on all these considerations,
horace decided that silence was his only possible policy, and, though
some moralists may condemn his conduct as disingenuous and wanting in
true moral courage, i venture to doubt whether any reader, however
independent, straightforward, and indifferent to notoriety and ridicule,
would have behaved otherwise in ventimore's extremely delicate and
difficult position.

some days passed, every working hour of which was spent by horace in the
rapture of creation. to every man with the soul of an artist in him
there comes at times--only too seldom in most cases--a revelation of
latent power that he had not dared to hope for. and now with ventimore
years of study and theorising which he had often been tempted to think
wasted began to bear golden fruit. he designed and drew with a rapidity
and originality, a sense of perfect mastery of the various problems to
be dealt with, and a delight in the working out of mass and detail, so
intoxicating that he almost dreaded lest he should be the victim of some
self-delusion.

his evenings were of course spent with the futvoyes, in discovering
sylvia in some new and yet more adorable aspect. altogether, he was very
much in love, very happy, and very busy--three states not invariably
found in combination.

and, as he had foreseen, he had effectually got rid of fakrash, who was
evidently too engrossed in the pursuit of solomon to think of anything
else. and there seemed no reason why he should abandon his search for a
generation or two, for it would probably take all that time to convince
him that that mighty monarch was no longer on the throne.

"it would have been too brutal to tell him myself," thought horace,
"when he was so keen on having his case reheard. and it gives him an
object, poor old buffer, and keeps him from interfering in my affairs,
so it's best for both of us."

horace's little dinner-party had been twice postponed, till he had begun
to have a superstitious fear that it would never come off; but at length
the professor had been induced to give an absolute promise for a certain
evening.

on the day before, after breakfast, horace had summoned his landlady to
a consultation on the _menu_. "nothing elaborate, you know, mrs.
rapkin," said horace, who, though he would have liked to provide a feast
of all procurable delicacies for sylvia's refection, was obliged to
respect her father's prejudices. "just a simple dinner, thoroughly well
cooked, and nicely served--as you know so well how to do it."

"i suppose, sir, you would require rapkin to wait?"

as the ex-butler was liable to trances on these occasions during which
he could do nothing but smile and bow with speechless politeness as he
dropped sauce-boats and plates, horace replied that he thought of having
someone in to avoid troubling mr. rapkin; but his wife expressed such
confidence in her husband's proving equal to all emergencies, that
ventimore waived the point, and left it to her to hire extra help if she
thought fit.

"now, what soup can you give us?" he inquired, as mrs. rapkin stood at
attention and quite unmollified.

after protracted mental conflict, she grudgingly suggested gravy
soup--which horace thought too unenterprising, and rejected in favour of
mock turtle. "well then, fish?" he continued; "how about fish?"

mrs. rapkin dragged the depths of her culinary resources for several
seconds, and finally brought to the surface what she called "a nice
fried sole." horace would not hear of it, and urged her to aspire to
salmon; she substituted smelts, which he opposed by a happy inspiration
of turbot and lobster sauce. the sauce, however, presented insuperable
difficulties to her mind, and she offered a compromise in the form of
cod--which he finally accepted as a fish which the professor could
hardly censure for ostentation.

next came the no less difficult questions of _entrée_ or no _entrée_, of
joint and bird. "what's in season just now?" said horace; "let me
see"--and glanced out of the window as he spoke, as though in search of
some outside suggestion.... "camels, by jove!" he suddenly exclaimed.

"_camels_, mr. ventimore, sir?" repeated mrs. rapkin, in some
bewilderment; and then, remembering that he was given to untimely
flippancy, she gave a tolerant little cough.

"i'll be shot if they _aren't_ camels!" said horace. "what do _you_ make
of 'em, mrs. rapkin?"

out of the faint mist which hung over the farther end of the square
advanced a procession of tall, dust-coloured animals, with long,
delicately poised necks and a mincing gait. even mrs. rapkin could not
succeed in making anything of them except camels.

"what the deuce does a caravan of camels want in vincent square?" said
horace, with a sudden qualm for which he could not account.

"most likely they belong to the barnum show, sir," suggested his
landlady. "i did hear they were coming to olympia again this year."

"why, of course," cried horace, intensely relieved. "it's on their way
from the docks--at least, it isn't _out_ of their way. or probably the
main road's up for repairs. that's it--they'll turn off to the left at
the corner. see, they've got arab drivers with them. wonderful how the
fellows manage them."

"it seems to me, sir," said mrs. rapkin, "that they're coming _our_
way--they seem to be stopping outside."

"don't talk such infernal i beg your pardon, mrs. rapkin; but why
on earth should barnum and bailey's camels come out of their way to call
on _me_? it's ridiculous, you know!" said horace, irritably.

"ridicklous it _may_ be, sir," she retorted, "but they're all layin'
down on the road opposite our door, as you can see--and them niggers is
making signs to you to come out and speak to 'em."

it was true enough. one by one the camels, which were apparently of the
purest breed, folded themselves up in a row like campstools at a sign
from their attendants, who were now making profound salaams towards the
window where ventimore was standing.

"i suppose i'd better go down and see what they want," he said, with
rather a sickly smile. "they may have lost the way to olympia.... i only
hope fakrash isn't at the bottom of this," he thought, as he went
downstairs. "but he'd come himself--at all events, he wouldn't send me a
message on such a lot of camels!" as he appeared on the doorstep, all
the drivers flopped down and rubbed their flat, black noses on the
curbstone.

"for heaven's sake get up!" said horace angrily. "this isn't
hammersmith. turn to the left, into the vauxhall bridge road, and ask a
policeman the nearest way to olympia."

"be not angry with thy slaves!" said the head driver, in excellent
english. "we are here by command of fakrash-el-aamash, our lord, whom we
are bound to obey. and we have brought thee these as gifts."

"my compliments to your master," said horace, between his teeth, "and
tell him that a london architect has no sort of occasion for camels. say
that i am extremely obliged--but am compelled to decline them."

"o highly born one," explained the driver, "the camels are not a
gift--but the loads which are upon the camels. suffer us, therefore,
since we dare not disobey our lord's commands, to carry these trifling
tokens of his good will into thy dwelling and depart in peace."

horace had not noticed till then that every camel bore a heavy burden,
which the attendants were now unloading. "oh, if you _must_!" he said,
not too graciously; "only do look sharp about it--there's a crowd
collecting already, and i don't want to have a constable here."

he returned to his rooms, where he found mrs. rapkin paralysed with
amazement. "it's--it's all right," he said; "i'd forgotten--it's only a
few oriental things from the place where that brass bottle came from,
you know. they've left them here--on approval."

"seems funny their sending their goods 'ome on camels, sir, doesn't it?"
said mrs. rapkin.

"not at all funny!" said horace; "they--they're an enterprising
firm--their way of advertising."

one after another, a train of dusky attendants entered, each of whom
deposited his load on the floor with a guttural grunt and returned
backward, until the sitting-room was blocked with piles of sacks, and
bales, and chests, whereupon the head driver appeared and intimated that
the tale of gifts was complete.

"i wonder what sort of tip this fellow expects," thought horace; "a
sovereign seems shabby--but it's all i can run to. i'll try him with
that."

but the overseer repudiated all idea of a gratuity with stately dignity,
and as horace saw him to the gate, he found a stolid constable by the
railings.

"this won't _do_, you know," said the constable; "these 'ere camels must
move on--or i shall 'ave to interfere."

"it's all right, constable," said horace, pressing into his hand the
sovereign the head driver had rejected; "they're going to move on now.
they've brought me a few presents from--from a friend of mine in the
east."

by this time the attendants had mounted the kneeling camels, which rose
with them, and swung off round the square in a long, swaying trot that
soon left the crowd far behind, staring blankly after the caravan as
camel after camel disappeared into the haze.

"i shouldn't mind knowin' that friend o' yours, sir," said the
constable; "open-hearted sort o' gentleman, i should think?"

"very!" said horace, savagely, and returned to his room, which mrs.
rapkin had now left.

his hands shook, though not with joy, as he untied some of the sacks and
bales and forced open the outlandish-looking chests, the contents of
which almost took away his breath.

for in the bales were carpets and tissues which he saw at a glance must
be of fabulous antiquity and beyond all price; the sacks held golden
ewers and vessels of strange workmanship and pantomimic proportions; the
chests were full of jewels--ropes of creamy-pink pearls as large as
average onions, strings of uncut rubies and emeralds, the smallest of
which would have been a tight fit in an ordinary collar-box, and
diamonds, roughly facetted and polished, each the size of a coconut, in
whose hearts quivered a liquid and prismatic radiance.

on the most moderate computation, the total value of these gifts could
hardly be less than several hundred millions; never probably in the
world's history had any treasury contained so rich a store.

it would have been difficult for anybody, on suddenly finding himself
the possessor of this immense incalculable wealth, to make any comment
quite worthy of the situation, but, surely, none could have been more
inadequate and indeed inappropriate than horace's--which, heartfelt as
it was, was couched in the simple monosyllable--"damn!"

chapter vii

"gratitude--a lively sense of favours to come"

most men on suddenly finding themselves in possession of such enormous
wealth would have felt some elation. ventimore, as we have seen, was
merely exasperated. and, although this attitude of his may strike the
reader as incomprehensible or absolutely wrong-headed, he had more
reason on his side than might appear at a first view.

it was undoubtedly the fact that, with the money these treasures
represented, he would be in a position to convulse the money markets of
europe and america, bring society to his feet, make and unmake
kingdoms--dominate, in short, the entire world.

"but, then," as horace told himself with a groan, "it wouldn't amuse me
in the least to convulse money markets. do i want to see the smartest
people in london grovelling for anything they think they're likely to
get out of me? as i should be perfectly well aware that their homage was
not paid to any personal merit of mine, i could hardly consider it
flattering. and why should i make kingdoms? the only thing i understand
and care about is making houses. then, am i likely to be a better hand
at dominating the world than all the others who have tried the
experiment? i doubt it."

he called to mind all the millionaires he had ever read or heard of;
they didn't seem to get much fun out of their riches. the majority of
them were martyrs to dyspepsia. they were often weighed down by the
cares and responsibilities of their position; the only people who were
unable to obtain an audience of them at any time were their friends;
they lived in a glare of publicity, and every post brought them
hundreds of begging letters, and a few threats; their children were in
constant danger from kidnappers, and they themselves, after knowing no
rest in life, could not be certain that even their tombs would be
undisturbed. whether they were extravagant or thrifty, they were equally
maligned, and, whatever the fortune they left behind them, they could be
absolutely certain that, in a couple of generations, it would be
entirely dissipated.

"and the biggest millionaire living," concluded horace, "is a pauper
compared with me!"

but there was another consideration--how was he to realise all this
wealth? he knew enough about precious stones to be aware that a ruby,
for instance, of the true "pigeon's blood" colour and the size of a
melon, as most of these rubies were, would be worth, even when cut,
considerably over a million; but who would buy it?

"i think i see myself," he reflected grimly, "calling on some diamond
merchant in hatton garden with half a dozen assorted jewels in a
gladstone bag. if he believed they were genuine, he'd probably have a
fit; but most likely he'd think i'd invented some dodge for
manufacturing them, and had been fool enough to overdo the size. anyhow,
he'd want to know how they came into my possession, and what could i
say? that they were part of a little present made to me by a jinnee in
grateful acknowledgment of my having relieved him from a brass bottle in
which he'd been shut up for nearly three thousand years? look at it how
you will, it's _not_ convincing. i fancy i can guess what he'd say. and
what an ass i should look! then suppose the thing got into the papers?"

got into the papers? why, of course it would get into the papers. as if
it were possible in these days for a young and hitherto unemployed
architect suddenly to surround himself with wondrous carpets, and gold
vessels, and gigantic jewels without attracting the notice of some
enterprising journalist. he would be interviewed; the story of his
curiously acquired riches would go the round of the papers; he would
find himself the object of incredulity, suspicion, ridicule. in
imagination he could already see the headlines on the news-sheets:

bottled billions

amazing arabesques by an architect

he says the jar contained a jinnee

sensational story

diverting details

and so on, through every phrase of alliterative ingenuity. he ground his
teeth at the mere thought of it. then sylvia would come to hear of it,
and what would _she_ think? she would naturally be repelled, as any
nice-minded girl would be, by the idea that her lover was in secret
alliance with a supernatural being. and her father and mother--would
they allow her to marry a man, however rich, whose wealth came from such
a questionable source? no one would believe that he had not made some
unholy bargain before consenting to set this incarcerated spirit
free--he, who had acted in absolute ignorance, who had persistently
declined all reward after realising what he had done!

no, it was too much. try as he might to do justice to the jinnee's
gratitude and generosity, he could not restrain a bitter resentment at
the utter want of consideration shown in overloading him with gifts so
useless and so compromising. no jinnee--however old, however unfamiliar
with the world as it is now--had any right to be such a fool!

and at this, above the ramparts of sacks and bales, which occupied all
the available space in the room, appeared mrs. rapkin's face.

"i was going to ask you, sir, before them parcels came," she began,
with a dry cough of disapproval, "what you would like in the way of
ongtray to-morrow night. i thought if i could find a sweetbread at all
reasonable"

to horace--surrounded as he was by incalculable riches--sweetbreads
seemed incongruous just then; the transition of thought was too violent.

"i can't bother about that now, mrs. rapkin," he said; "we'll settle it
to-morrow. i'm too busy."

"i suppose most of these things will have to go back, sir, if they're
only sent on approval like?"

if he only knew where and how he could send them back! "i--i'm not
sure," he said; "i may have to keep them."

"well, sir, bargain or none, i wouldn't have 'em as a gift myself, being
so dirty and fusty; they can't be no use to anybody, not to mention
there being no room to move with them blocking up all the place. i'd
better tell rapkin to carry 'em all upstairs out of people's way."

"certainly not," said horace, sharply, by no means anxious for the
rapkins to discover the real nature of his treasures. "don't touch them,
either of you. leave them exactly as they are, do you understand?"

"as you please, mr. ventimore, sir; only, if they're not to be
interfered with, i don't see myself how you're going to set your friends
down to dinner to-morrow, that's all."

and, indeed, considering that the table and every available chair, and
even the floor, were heaped so high with valuables that horace himself
could only just squeeze his way between the piles, it seemed as if his
guests might find themselves inconveniently cramped.

"it will be all right," he said, with an optimism he was very far from
feeling; "we'll manage somehow--leave it to me."

before he left for his office he took the precaution to baffle any
inquisitiveness on the part of his landlady by locking his sitting-room
door and carrying away the key, but it was in a very different mood from
his former light-hearted confidence that he sat down to his
drawing-board in great cloister street that morning. he could not
concentrate his mind; his enthusiasm and his ideas had alike deserted
him.

he flung down the dividers he had been using and pushed away the nest of
saucers of indian ink and colours in a fit of petulance. "it's no good,"
he exclaimed aloud; "i feel a perfect duffer this morning. i couldn't
even design a decent dog-kennel!"

even as he spoke he became conscious of a presence in the room, and,
looking round, saw fakrash the jinnee standing at his elbow, smiling
down on him more benevolently than ever, and with a serene expectation
of being warmly welcomed and thanked, which made horace rather ashamed
of his own inability to meet it.

"he's a thoroughly good-natured old chap," he thought,
self-reproachfully. "he means well, and i'm a beast not to feel more
glad to see him. and yet, hang it all! i can't have him popping in and
out of the office like a rabbit whenever the fancy takes him!"

"peace be upon thee," said fakrash. "moderate the trouble of thy heart,
and impart thy difficulties to me."

"oh, they're nothing, thanks," said horace, feeling decidedly
embarrassed. "i got stuck over my work for the moment, and it worried me
a little--that's all."

"then thou hast not yet received the gifts which i commanded should be
delivered at thy dwelling-place?"

"oh, indeed i have!" replied horace; "and--and i really don't know how
to thank you for them."

"a few trifling presents," answered the jinnee, "and by no means suited
to thy dignity--yet the best in my power to bestow upon thee for the
time being."

"my dear sir, they simply overwhelm me with their magnificence! they're
beyond all price, and--and i've no idea what to do with such a
superabundance."

"a superfluity of good things is good," was the jinnee's sententious
reply.

"not in my particular case. i--i quite feel your goodness and
generosity; but, indeed, as i told you before, it's really impossible
for me to accept any such reward."

fakrash's brows contracted slightly. "how sayest thou that it is
impossible--seeing that these things are already in thy possession?"

"i know," said horace; "but--you won't be offended if i speak quite
plainly?"

"art thou not even as a son to me, and can i be angered at any words of
thine?"

"well," said horace, with sudden hope, "honestly, then, i would very
much rather--if you're sure you don't mind--that you would take them all
back again."

"what? dost thou demand that i, fakrash-el-aamash, should consent to
receive back the gifts i have bestowed? are they, then, of so little
value in thy sight?"

"they're of too much value. if i took such a reward for--for a very
ordinary service, i should never be able to respect myself again."

"this is not the reasoning of an intelligent person," said the jinnee,
coldly.

"if you think me a fool, i can't help it. i'm not an ungrateful fool, at
all events. but i feel very strongly that i can't keep these gifts of
yours."

"so thou wouldst have me break the oath which i swore to reward thee
fitly for thy kind action?"

"but you _have_ rewarded me already," said horace, "by contriving that a
wealthy merchant should engage me to build him a residence. and--forgive
my plain speaking--if you truly desire my happiness (as i am sure you
do) you will relieve me of all these precious gems and merchandise,
because, to be frank, they will _not_ make me happy. on the contrary,
they are making me extremely uncomfortable."

"in the days of old," said fakrash, "all men pursued wealth; nor could
any amass enough to satisfy his desires. have riches, then, become so
contemptible in mortal eyes that thou findest them but an encumbrance?
explain the matter."

horace felt a natural delicacy in giving his real reasons. "i can't
answer for other men," he said. "all i know is that i've never been
accustomed to being rich, and i'd rather get used to it gradually, and
be able to feel that i owed it, as far as possible, to my own exertions.
for, as i needn't tell _you_, mr. fakrash, riches alone don't make any
fellow happy. you must have observed that they're apt to--well, to land
him in all kinds of messes and worries.... i'm talking like a confounded
copybook," he thought, "but i don't care how priggish i am if i can only
get my way!"

fakrash was deeply impressed. "o young man of marvellous moderation!" he
cried. "thy sentiments are not inferior to those of the great suleyman
himself (on whom be peace!). yet even he doth not utterly despise them,
for he hath gold and ivory and precious stones in abundance. nor
hitherto have i ever met a human being capable of rejecting them when
offered. but, since thou seemest sincere in holding that my poor and
paltry gifts will not advance thy welfare, and since i would do thee
good and not evil--be it even as thou wouldst. for excellently was it
said: 'the worth of a present depends not on itself, nor on the giver,
but on the receiver alone.'"

horace could hardly believe that he had really prevailed. "it's
extremely good of you, sir," he said, "to take it so well. and if you
_could_ let that caravan call for them as soon as possible, it would be
a great convenience to me. i mean--er--the fact is, i'm expecting a few
friends to dine with me to-morrow, and, as my rooms are rather small at
the best of times, i don't quite know how i can manage to entertain
them at all unless something is done."

"it will be the easiest of actions," replied fakrash; "therefore, have
no fear that, when the time cometh, thou wilt not be able to entertain
thy friends in a fitting manner. and for the caravan, it shall set out
without delay."

"by jove, though, i'd forgotten one thing," said horace: "i've locked up
the room where your presents are--they won't be able to get in without
the key."

"against the servants of the jinn neither bolts nor bars can prevail.
they shall enter therein and remove all that they brought thee, since it
is thy desire."

"very many thanks," said horace. "and you do _really_ understand that
i'm every bit as grateful as if i could keep the things? you see, i want
all my time and all my energies to complete the designs for this
building, which," he added gracefully, "i should never be in a position
to do at all, but for your assistance."

"on my arrival," said fakrash, "i heard thee lamenting the difficulties
of the task; wherein do they consist?"

"oh," said horace, "it's a little difficult to please all the different
people concerned, and myself too. i want to make something of it that i
shall be proud of, and that will give me a reputation. it's a large
house, and there will be a good deal of work in it; but i shall manage
it all right."

"this is a great undertaking indeed," remarked the jinnee, after he had
asked various by no means unintelligent questions and received the
answers. "but be persuaded that it shall all turn out most fortunately
and thou shalt obtain great renown. and now," he concluded, "i am
compelled to take leave of thee, for i am still without any certain
tidings of suleyman."

"you mustn't let me keep you," said horace, who had been on thorns for
some minutes lest beevor should return and find him with his mysterious
visitor. "you see," he added instructively, "so long as you _will_
neglect your own much more important affairs to look after mine, you can
hardly expect to make _much_ progress, can you?"

"how excellent is the saying," replied the jinnee: "'the time which is
spent in doing kindnesses, call it not wasted.'"

"yes, that's very good," said horace, feeling driven to silence this
maxim, if possible, with one of his own invention. "but _we_ have a
saying too--how does it go? ah, i remember. 'it is possible for a
kindness to be more inconvenient than an injury.'"

"marvellously gifted was he who discovered such a saying!" cried
fakrash.

"i imagine," said horace, "he learnt it from his own experience. by the
way, what place were you thinking of drawing--i mean trying--next for
suleyman?"

"i purpose to repair to nineveh, and inquire there."

"capital," said ventimore, with hearty approval, for he hoped that this
would take the jinnee some little time. "wonderful city, nineveh, from
all i've heard--though not quite what it used to be, perhaps. then
there's babylon--you might go on there. and if you shouldn't hear of him
there, why not strike down into central africa, and do that thoroughly?
or south america; it's a pity to lose any chance--you've never been to
south america yet?"

"i have not so much as heard of such a country, and how should suleyman
be there?"

"pardon me, i didn't say he _was_ there. all i meant to convey was, that
he's quite as likely to be there as anywhere else. but if you're going
to nineveh first, you'd better lose no more time, for i've always
understood that it's rather an awkward place to get at--though probably
_you_ won't find it very difficult."

"i care not," said fakrash, "though the search be long, for in travel
there are five advantages"

"i know," interrupted horace, "so don't stop to describe them now. i
should like to see you fairly started, and you really mustn't think it
necessary to break off your search again on my account, because, thanks
to you, i shall get on splendidly alone for the future--if you'll kindly
see that that merchandise is removed."

"thine abode shall not be encumbered with it for another hour," said the
jinnee. "o thou judicious one, in whose estimation wealth is of no
value, know that i have never encountered a mortal who pleased me as
thou hast; and moreover, be assured that such magnanimity as thine shall
not go without a recompense!"

"how often must i tell you," said horace, in a glow of impatience, "that
i am already much more than recompensed? now, my kind, generous old
friend," he added, with an emotion that was not wholly insincere, "the
time has come to bid you farewell--for ever. let me picture you as
revisiting your former haunts, penetrating to quarters of the globe
(for, whether you are aware of it or not, this earth of ours _is_ a
globe) hitherto unknown to you, refreshing your mind by foreign travel
and the study of mankind--but never, never for a moment losing sight of
your main object, the eventual discovery of and reconciliation with
suleyman (on whom be peace!). that is the greatest, the only happiness
you can give me now. good-bye, and _bon voyage_!"

"may allah never deprive thy friends of thy presence!" returned the
jinnee, who was apparently touched by this exordium, "for truly thou art
a most excellent young man!"

and stepping back into the fireplace, he was gone in an instant.

ventimore sank back in his chair with a sigh of relief. he had begun to
fear that the jinnee never would take himself off, but he had gone at
last--and for good.

he was half ashamed of himself for feeling so glad, for fakrash was a
good-natured old thing enough in his way. only he _would_ overdo things:
he had no sense of proportion. "why," thought horace, "if a fellow
expressed a modest wish for a canary in a cage he's just the sort of old
jinnee to bring him a whole covey of rocs in an aviary about ten times
the size of the crystal palace. however, he _does_ understand now that i
can't take anything more from him, and he isn't offended either, so
_that's_ all settled. now i can set to work and knock off these plans in
peace and quietness."

but he had not done much before he heard sounds in the next room which
told him that beevor had returned at last. he had been expected back
from the country for the last day or two, and it was fortunate that he
had delayed so long, thought ventimore, as he went in to see him and to
tell him the unexpected piece of good fortune that he himself had met
with since they last met. it is needless to say that, in giving his
account, he abstained from any mention of the brass bottle or the
jinnee, as unessential elements in his story.

beevor's congratulations were quite as cordial as could be expected, as
soon as he fully understood that no hoax was intended. "well, old man,"
he said, "i _am_ glad. i really am, you know. to think of a prize like
that coming to you the very first time! and you don't even know how this
mr. wackerbath came to hear of you--just happened to see your name up
outside and came in, i expect. why, i dare say, if i hadn't chanced to
go away as i did--and about a couple of paltry two thousand pound
houses, too! ah, well, i don't grudge you your luck, though it _does_
seem rather it was worth waiting for; you'll be cutting _me_ out
before long--if you don't make a mess of this job. i mean, you know, old
chap, if you don't go and give your city man a gothic castle when what
he wants is something with plenty of plate-glass windows and a
corinthian portico. that's the rock i see ahead of _you_. you mustn't
mind my giving you a word of warning!"

"oh no," said ventimore; "but i shan't give him either a gothic castle
or plenty of plate-glass. i venture to think he'll be pleased with the
general idea as i'm working it out."

"let's hope so," said beevor. "if you get into any difficulty, you
know," he added, with a touch of patronage, "just you come to me."

"thanks," said horace, "i will. but i'm getting on very fairly at
present."

"i should rather like to see what you've made of it. i might be able to
give you a wrinkle here and there."

"it's awfully good of you, but i think i'd rather you didn't see the
plans till they're quite finished," said horace. the truth was that he
was perfectly aware that the other would not be in sympathy with his
ideas; and horace, who had just been suffering from a cold fit of
depression about his work, rather shrank from any kind of criticism.

"oh, just as you please!" said beevor, a little stiffly; "you always
_were_ an obstinate beggar. i've had a certain amount of experience, you
know, in my poor little pottering way, and i thought i might possibly
have saved you a cropper or two. but if you think you can manage better
alone--only don't get bolted with by one of those architectural hobbies
of yours, that's all."

"all right, old fellow. i'll ride my hobby on the curb," said horace,
laughing, as he went back to his own office, where he found that all his
former certainty and enjoyment of his work had returned to him, and by
the end of the day he had made so much progress that his designs needed
only a few finishing touches to be complete enough for his client's
inspection.

better still, on returning to his rooms that evening to change before
going to kensington, he found that the admirable fakrash had kept his
promise--every chest, sack, and bale had been cleared away.

"them camels come back for the things this afternoon, sir," said mrs.
rapkin, "and it put me in a fluster at first, for i made sure you'd
locked your door and took the key. but i must have been
mistook--leastways, them arabs got in somehow. i hope you meant
everything to go back?"

"quite," said horace; "i saw the--the person who sent them this morning,
and told him there was nothing i cared for enough to keep."

"and like his impidence sending you a lot o' rubbish like that on
approval--and on camels, too!" declared mrs. rapkin. "i'm sure i don't
know what them advertising firms will try next--pushing, _i_ call it."

now that everything was gone, horace felt a little natural regret and
doubt whether he need have been quite so uncompromising in his refusal
of the treasures. "i might have kept some of those tissues and things
for sylvia," he thought; "and she loves pearls. and a prayer-carpet
would have pleased the professor tremendously. but no, after all, it
wouldn't have done. sylvia couldn't go about in pearls the size of new
potatoes, and the professor would only have ragged me for more reckless
extravagance. besides, if i'd taken any of the jinnee's gifts, he might
keep on pouring more in, till i should be just where i was before--or
worse off, really, because i couldn't decently refuse them, then. so
it's best as it is."

and really, considering his temperament and the peculiar nature of his
position, it is not easy to see how he could have arrived at any other
conclusion.

chapter viii

bachelor's quarters

horace was feeling particularly happy as he walked back the next evening
to vincent square. he had the consciousness of having done a good day's
work, for the sketch-plans for mr. wackerbath's mansion were actually
completed and despatched to his business address, while ventimore now
felt a comfortable assurance that his designs would more than satisfy
his client.

but it was not that which made him so light of heart. that night his
rooms were to be honoured for the first time by sylvia's presence. she
would tread upon his carpet, sit in his chairs, comment upon, and
perhaps even handle, his books and ornaments--and all of them would
retain something of her charm for ever after. if she only came! for even
now he could not quite believe that she really would; that some untoward
event would not make a point of happening to prevent her, as he
sometimes doubted whether his engagement was not too sweet and wonderful
to be true--or, at all events, to last.

as to the dinner, his mind was tolerably easy, for he had settled the
remaining details of the _menu_ with his landlady that morning, and he
could hope that without being so sumptuous as to excite the professor's
wrath, it would still be not altogether unworthy--and what goods could
be rare and dainty enough?--to be set before sylvia.

he would have liked to provide champagne, but he knew that wine would
savour of ostentation in the professor's judgment, so he had contented
himself instead with claret, a sound vintage which he knew he could
depend upon. flowers, he thought, were clearly permissible, and he had
called at a florist's on his way and got some chrysanthemums of palest
yellow and deepest terra-cotta, the finest he could see. some of them
would look well on the centre of the table in an old nankin
blue-and-white bowl he had; the rest he could arrange about the room:
there would just be time to see to all that before dressing.

occupied with these thoughts, he turned into vincent square, which
looked vaster than ever with the murky haze, enclosed by its high
railings, and under a wide expanse of steel-blue sky, across which the
clouds were driving fast like ships in full sail scudding for harbour
before a storm. against the mist below, the young and nearly leafless
trees showed flat, black profiles as of pressed seaweed, and the sky
immediately above the house-tops was tinged with a sullen red from miles
of lighted streets; from the river came the long-drawn tooting of tugs,
mingled with the more distant wail and hysterical shrieks of railway
engines on the lambeth lines.

and now he reached the old semi-detached house in which he lodged, and
noticed for the first time how the trellis-work of the veranda made,
with the bared creepers and hanging baskets, a kind of decorative
pattern against the windows, which were suffused with a roseate glow
that looked warm and comfortable and hospitable. he wondered whether
sylvia would notice it when she arrived.

he passed under the old wrought-iron arch that once held an oil-lamp,
and up a short but rather steep flight of steps, which led to a brick
porch built out at the side. then he let himself in, and stood
spellbound with perplexed amazement,--for he was in a strange house.

in place of the modest passage with the yellow marble wall-paper, the
mahogany hat-stand, and the elderly barometer in a state of chronic
depression which he knew so well, he found an arched octagonal
entrance-hall with arabesques of blue, crimson, and gold, and
richly-embroidered hangings; the floor was marble, and from a shallow
basin of alabaster in the centre a perfumed fountain rose and fell with
a lulling patter.

"i must have mistaken the number," he thought, quite forgetting that his
latch-key had fitted, and he was just about to retreat before his
intrusion was discovered, when the hangings parted, and mrs. rapkin
presented herself, making so deplorably incongruous a figure in such
surroundings, and looking so bewildered and woebegone, that horace, in
spite of his own increasing uneasiness, had some difficulty in keeping
his gravity.

"oh, mr. ventimore, sir," she lamented; "whatever _will_ you go and do
next, i wonder? to think of your going and having the whole place done
up and altered out of knowledge like this, without a word of warning! if
any halterations were required, i _do_ think as me and rapkin had the
right to be consulted."

horace let all his chrysanthemums drop unheeded into the fountain. he
understood now: indeed, he seemed in some way to have understood almost
from the first, only he would not admit it even to himself.

the irrepressible jinnee was at the bottom of this, of course. he
remembered now having made that unfortunate remark the day before about
the limited accommodation his rooms afforded.

clearly fakrash must have taken a mental note of it, and, with that
insatiable munificence which was one of his worst failings, had
determined, by way of a pleasant surprise, to entirely refurnish and
redecorate the apartments according to his own ideas.

it was extremely kind of him; it showed a truly grateful
disposition--"but, oh!" as horace thought, in the bitterness of his
soul, "if he would only learn to let well alone and mind his own
business!"

however, the thing was done now, and he must accept the responsibility
for it, since he could hardly disclose the truth. "didn't i mention i
was having some alterations made?" he said carelessly. "they've got the
work done rather sooner than i expected. were--were they long over it?"

"i'm sure i can't tell you, sir, having stepped out to get some things i
wanted in for to-night; and rapkin, he was round the corner at his
reading-room; and when i come back it was all done and the workmen gone
'ome; and how they could have finished such a job in the time beats me
altogether, for when we 'ad the men in to do the back kitchen they took
ten days over it."

"well," said horace, evading this point, "however they've done this,
they've done it remarkably well--you'll admit that, mrs. rapkin?"

"that's as may be sir," said mrs. rapkin, with a sniff, "but it ain't
_my_ taste, nor yet i don't think it will be rapkin's taste when he
comes to see it."

it was not ventimore's taste either, though he was not going to confess
it. "sorry for that, mrs. rapkin," he said, "but i've no time to talk
about it now. i must rush upstairs and dress."

"begging your pardon, sir, but that's a total unpossibility--for they've
been and took away the staircase.'

"taken away the staircase? nonsense!" cried horace.

"so _i_ think, mr. ventimore--but it's what them men have done, and if
you don't believe me, come and see for yourself!"

she drew the hangings aside, and revealed to ventimore's astonished gaze
a vast pillared hall with a lofty domed roof, from which hung several
lamps, diffusing a subdued radiance. high up in the wall, on his left,
were the two windows which he judged to have formerly belonged to his
sitting-room (for either from delicacy or inability, or simply because
it had not occurred to him, the jinnee had not interfered with the
external structure), but the windows were now masked by a perforated
and gilded lattice, which accounted for the pattern horace had noticed
from without. the walls were covered with blue-and-white oriental tiles,
and a raised platform of alabaster on which were divans ran round two
sides of the hall, while the side opposite to him was pierced with
horseshoe-shaped arches, apparently leading to other apartments. the
centre of the marble floor was spread with costly rugs and piles of
cushions, their rich hues glowing through the gold with which they were
intricately embroidered.

"well," said the unhappy horace, scarcely knowing what he was saying,
"it--it all looks very _cosy_, mrs. rapkin."

"it's not for me to say, sir; but i should like to know where you
thought of dining?"

"where?" said horace. "why, here, of course. there's plenty of room."

"there isn't a table left in the house," said mrs. rapkin; "so, unless
you'd wish the cloth laid on the floor"

"oh, there must be a table somewhere," said horace, impatiently, "or you
can borrow one. don't _make_ difficulties, mrs. rapkin. rig up anything
you like.... now i must be off and dress."

he got rid of her, and, on entering one of the archways, discovered a
smaller room, in cedar-wood encrusted with ivory and mother-o'-pearl,
which was evidently his bedroom. a gorgeous robe, stiff with gold and
glittering with ancient gems, was laid out for him--for the jinnee had
thought of everything--but ventimore, naturally, preferred his own
evening clothes.

"mr. rapkin!" he shouted, going to another arch that seemed to
communicate with the basement.

"sir?" replied his landlord, who had just returned from his
"reading-room," and now appeared, without a tie and in his
shirt-sleeves, looking pale and wild, as was, perhaps, intelligible in
the circumstances. as he entered his unfamiliar marble halls he
staggered, and his red eyes rolled and his mouth gaped in a cod-like
fashion. "they've been at it 'ere, too, seemin'ly," he remarked huskily.

"there have been a few changes," said horace, quietly, "as you can see.
you don't happen to know where they've put my dress-clothes, do you?"

"i don't 'appen to know where they've put nothink. your dress clothes?
why, i dunno where they've bin and put our little parler where me and
maria 'ave set of a hevenin' all these years regular. i dunno where
they've put the pantry, nor yet the bath-room, with 'ot and cold water
laid on at my own expense. and you arsk me to find your hevenin' soot! i
consider, sir, i consider that a unwall--that a most unwarrant-terrible
liberty have bin took at my expense."

"my good man, don't talk rubbish!" said horace.

"i'm talking to you about what _i know_, and i assert that an
englishman's 'ome is his cashle, and nobody's got the right when his
backsh turned to go and make a 'ummums of it. not _nobody_ 'asn't!"

"make a _what_ of it?" cried ventimore.

"a 'ummums--that's english, ain't it? a bloomin' turkish baths! who do
you suppose is goin' to take apartments furnished in this 'ere
ridic'loush style? what am i goin' to say to my landlord? it'll about
ruing me, this will; and after you bein' a lodger 'ere for five year and
more, and regarded by me and maria in the light of one of the family.
it's 'ard--it's damned 'ard!"

"now, look here," said ventimore, sharply--for it was obvious that mr.
rapkin's studies had been lightened by copious refreshment--"pull
yourself together, man, and listen to me."

"i respeckfully decline to pull myshelf togerrer f'r anybody livin',"
said mr. rapkin, with a noble air. "i shtan' 'ere upon my dignity as a
man, sir. i shay, i shtand 'ere upon" here he waved his hand, and
sat down suddenly upon the marble floor.

"you can stand on anything you like--or can," said horace; "but hear
what i've got to say. the--the people who made all these alterations
went beyond my instructions. i never wanted the house interfered with
like this. still, if your landlord doesn't see that its value is
immensely improved, he's a fool, that's all. anyway, i'll take care
_you_ shan't suffer. if i have to put everything back in its former
state, i will, at my own expense. so don't bother any more about
_that_."

"you're a gen'l'man, mr. ventimore," said rapkin, cautiously regaining
his feet. "there's no mishtaking a gen'l'man. _i'm_ a gen'l'man."

"of course you are," said horace genially, "and i'll tell you how you're
going to show it. you're going straight downstairs to get your good wife
to pour some cold water over your head; and then you will finish
dressing, see what you can do to get a table of some sort and lay it for
dinner, and be ready to announce my friends when they arrive, and wait
afterwards. do you see?"

"that will be all ri', mr. ventimore," said rapkin, who was not far gone
enough to be beyond understanding or obeying. "you leave it entirely to
me. i'll unnertake that your friends shall be made comforrable, perfelly
comforrable. i've lived as butler in the besht, the mosht ecxlu--most
arishto--you know the sort o' fam'lies i'm tryin' to r'member--and--and
everything was always all ri', and _i_ shall be all ri' in a few
minutes."

with this assurance he stumbled downstairs, leaving horace relieved to
some extent. rapkin would be sober enough after his head had been under
the tap for a few minutes, and in any case there would be the hired
waiter to rely upon.

if he could only find out where his evening clothes were! he returned to
his room and made another frantic search--but they were nowhere to be
found; and as he could not bring himself to receive his guests in his
ordinary morning costume--which the professor would probably construe as
a deliberate slight, and which would certainly seem a solecism in mrs.
futvoye's eyes, if not in her daughter's--he decided to put on the
eastern robes, with the exception of a turban, which he could not manage
to wind round his head.

thus arrayed he re-entered the domed hall, where he was annoyed to find
that no attempt had been made as yet to prepare a dinner-table, and he
was just looking forlornly round for a bell when rapkin appeared. he had
apparently followed horace's advice, for his hair looked wet and sleek,
and he was comparatively sober.

"this is too bad!" cried horace; "my friends may be here at any moment
now--and nothing done. you don't propose to wait at table like that, do
you?" he added, as he noted the man's overcoat and the comforter round
his throat.

"i do not propose to wait in any garments whatsoever," said rapkin; "i'm
a-goin' out, i am."

"very well," said horace; "then send the waiter up--i suppose he's
come?"

"he come--but he went away again--i told him as he wouldn't be
required."

"you told him that!" horace said angrily, and then controlled himself.
"come, rapkin, be reasonable. you can't really mean to leave your wife
to cook the dinner, and serve it too!"

"she ain't intending to do neither; she've left the house already."

"you must fetch her back," cried horace. "good heavens, man, _can't_ you
see what a fix you're leaving me in? my friends have started long
ago--it's too late to wire to them, or make any other arrangements."

there was a knock, as he spoke, at the front door; and odd enough was
the familiar sound of the cast-iron knocker in that arabian hall.

"there they are!" he said, and the idea of meeting them at the door and
proposing an instant adjournment to a restaurant occurred to him--till
he suddenly recollected that he would have to change and try to find
some money, even for that. "for the last time, rapkin," he cried in
despair, "do you mean to tell me there's no dinner ready?"

"oh," said rapkin, "there's dinner right enough, and a lot o' barbarious
furriners downstairs a cookin' of it--that's what broke maria's 'art--to
see it all took out of her 'ands, after the trouble she'd gone to."

"but i must have somebody to wait," exclaimed horace.

"you've got waiters enough, as far as that goes. but if you expect a
hordinary christian man to wait along of a lot o' narsty niggers, and be
at their beck and call, you're mistook, sir, for i'm going to sleep the
night at my brother-in-law's and take his advice, he bein' a doorkeeper
at a solicitor's orfice and knowing the law, about this 'ere business,
and so i wish you a good hevening, and 'oping your dinner will be to
your liking and satisfaction."

he went out by the farther archway, while from the entrance-hall horace
could hear voices he knew only too well. the futvoyes had come; well, at
all events, it seemed that there would be something for them to eat,
since fakrash, in his anxiety to do the thing thoroughly, had furnished
both the feast and attendance himself--but who was there to announce the
guests? where were these waiters rapkin had spoken of? ought he to go
and bring in his visitors himself?

these questions answered themselves the next instant, for, as he stood
there under the dome, the curtains of the central arch were drawn with a
rattle, and disclosed a double line of tall slaves in rich raiment,
their onyx eyes rolling and their teeth flashing in their chocolate-hued
countenances, as they salaamed.

between this double line stood professor and mrs. futvoye and sylvia,
who had just removed their wraps and were gazing in undisguised
astonishment on the splendours which met their view.

horace advanced to receive them; he felt he was in for it now, and the
only course left him was to put as good a face as he could on the
matter, and trust to luck to pull him through without discovery or
disaster.

chapter ix

"persicos odi, puer, apparatus"

"so you've found your way here at last?" said horace, as he shook hands
heartily with the professor and mrs. futvoye. "i can't tell you how
delighted i am to see you."

as a matter of fact, he was very far from being at ease, which made him
rather over-effusive, but he was determined that, if he could help it,
he would not betray the slightest consciousness of anything _bizarre_ or
unusual in his domestic arrangements.

"and these," said mrs. futvoye, who was extremely stately in black,
with old lace and steel embroidery--"these are the bachelor lodgings you
were so modest about! really," she added, with a humorous twinkle in her
shrewd eyes, "you young men seem to understand how to make yourselves
comfortable--don't they, anthony?"

"they do, indeed," said the professor, dryly, though it manifestly cost
him some effort to conceal his appreciation. "to produce such results as
these must, if i mistake not, have entailed infinite research--and
considerable expense."

"no," said horace, "no. you--you'd be surprised if you knew how little."

"i should have imagined," retorted the professor, "that _any_ outlay on
apartments which i presume you do not contemplate occupying for an
extended period must be money thrown away. but, doubtless, you know
best."

"but your rooms are quite wonderful, horace!" cried sylvia, her charming
eyes dilating with admiration. "and where, _where_ did you get that
magnificent dressing-gown? i never saw anything so lovely in my life!"

she herself was lovely enough in a billowy, shimmering frock of a
delicate apple-green hue, her only ornament a deep-blue egyptian scarab
with spread wings, which was suspended from her neck by a slender gold
chain.

"i--i ought to apologise for receiving you in this costume," said
horace, with embarrassment; "but the fact is, i couldn't find my evening
clothes anywhere, so--so i put on the first things that came to hand."

"it is hardly necessary," said the professor, conscious of being
correctly clad, and unconscious that his shirt-front was bulging and his
long-eared white tie beginning to work up towards his left jaw--"hardly
necessary to offer any apology for the simplicity of your costume--which
is entirely in keeping with the--ah--strictly oriental character of your
interior."

"_i_ feel dreadfully out of keeping!" said sylvia, "for there's nothing
in the least oriental about _me_--unless it's my scarab--and he's i
don't know how many centuries behind the time, poor dear!"

"if you said 'thousands of years,' my dear," corrected the professor,
"you would be more accurate. that scarab was taken out of a tomb of the
thirteenth dynasty."

"well, i'm sure he'd rather be where he is," said sylvia, and ventimore
entirely agreed with her. "horace, i _must_ look at everything. how
clever and original of you to transform an ordinary london house into
this!"

"oh, well, you see," explained horace, "it--it wasn't exactly done by
me."

"whoever did it," said the professor, "must have devoted considerable
study to eastern art and architecture. may i ask the name of the firm
who executed the alterations?"

"i really couldn't tell you, sir," answered horace, who was beginning
to understand how very bad a _mauvais quart d'heure_ can be.

"you can't tell me!" exclaimed the professor. "you order these
extensive, and _i_ should say expensive, decorations, and you don't know
the firm you selected to carry them out!"

"of course i _know_," said horace, "only i don't happen to remember at
this moment. let me see, now. was it liberty? no, i'm almost certain it
wasn't liberty. it might have been maple, but i'm not sure. whoever did
do it, they were marvellously cheap."

"i am glad to hear it," said the professor, in his most unpleasant tone.
"where is your dining-room?"

"why, i rather think," said horace, helplessly, as he saw a train of
attendants laying a round cloth on the floor, "i rather think _this_ is
the dining-room."

"you appear to be in some doubt?" said the professor.

"i leave it to them--it depends where they choose to lay the cloth,"
said horace. "sometimes in one place; sometimes in another. there's a
great charm in uncertainty," he faltered.

"doubtless," said the professor.

by this time two of the slaves, under the direction of a tall and
turbaned black, had set a low ebony stool, inlaid with silver and
tortoiseshell in strange devices, on the round carpet, when other
attendants followed with a circular silver tray containing covered
dishes, which they placed on the stool and salaamed.

"your--ah--groom of the chambers," said the professor, "seems to have
decided that we should dine here. i observe they are making signs to you
that the food is on the table."

"so it is," said ventimore. "shall we sit down?"

"but, my dear horace," said mrs. futvoye, "your butler has forgotten the
chairs."

"you don't appear to realise, my dear," said the professor, "that in
such an interior as this chairs would be hopelessly incongruous."

"i'm afraid there aren't any," said horace, for there was nothing but
four fat cushions. "let's sit down on these," he proposed. "it--it's
more fun!"

"at my time of life," said the professor, irritably, as he let himself
down on the plumpest cushion, "such fun as may be derived from eating
one's meals on the floor fails to appeal to my sense of humour. however,
i admit that it is thoroughly oriental."

"_i_ think it's delightful," said sylvia; "ever so much nicer than a
stiff, conventional dinner-party."

"one may be unconventional," remarked her father, "without escaping the
penalty of stiffness. go away, sir! go away!" he added snappishly, to
one of the slaves, who was attempting to pour water over his hands.
"your servant, ventimore, appears to imagine that i go out to dinner
without taking the trouble to wash my hands previously. this, i may
mention, is _not_ the case."

"it's only an eastern ceremony, professor," said horace.

"i am perfectly well aware of what is customary in the east," retorted
the professor; "it does not follow that such--ah--hygienic precautions
are either necessary or desirable at a western table."

horace made no reply; he was too much occupied in gazing blankly at the
silver dish-covers and wondering what in the world might be underneath;
nor was his perplexity relieved when the covers were removed, for he was
quite at a loss to guess how he was supposed to help the contents
without so much as a fork.

the chief attendant, however, solved that difficulty by intimating in
pantomime that the guests were expected to use their fingers.

sylvia accomplished this daintily and with intense amusement, but her
father and mother made no secret of their repugnance. "if i were dining
in the desert with a sheik, sir," observed the professor, "i should, i
hope, know how to conform to his habits and prejudices. here, in the
heart of london, i confess all this strikes me as a piece of needless
pedantry."

"i'm very sorry," said horace; "i'd have some knives and forks if i
could--but i'm afraid these fellows don't even understand what they are,
so it's useless to order any. we--we must rough it a little, that's all.
i hope that--er--fish is all right, professor?"

he did not know precisely what kind of fish it was, but it was fried in
oil of sesame and flavoured with a mixture of cinnamon and ginger, and
the professor did not appear to be making much progress with it.
ventimore himself would have infinitely preferred the original cod and
oyster sauce, but that could not be helped now.

"thank you," said the professor, "it is curious--but characteristic. not
_any_ more, thank you."

horace could only trust that the next course would be more of a success.
it was a dish of mutton, stewed with peaches, jujubes and sugar, which
sylvia declared was delicious. her parents made no comment.

"might i ask for something to drink?" said the professor, presently;
whereupon a cupbearer poured him a goblet of iced sherbet perfumed with
conserve of violets.

"i'm very sorry, my dear fellow," he said, after sipping it, "but if i
drink this i shall be ill all next day. if i might have a glass of
wine"

another slave instantly handed him a cup of wine, which he tasted and
set down with a wry face and a shudder. horace tried some afterwards,
and was not surprised. it was a strong, harsh wine, in which goatskin
and resin struggled for predominance.

"it's an old and, i make no doubt, a fine wine," observed the professor,
with studied politeness, "but i fancy it must have suffered in
transportation. i really think that, with my gouty tendency, a little
whisky and apollinaris would be better for me--if you keep such
occidental fluids in the house?"

horace felt convinced that it would be useless to order the slaves to
bring whisky or apollinaris, which were of course, unknown in the
jinnee's time, so he could do nothing but apologise for their absence.

"no matter," said the professor; "i am not so thirsty that i cannot wait
till i get home."

it was some consolation that both sylvia and her mother commended the
sherbet, and even appreciated--or were so obliging as to say they
appreciated--the _entrée_, which consisted of rice and mincemeat wrapped
in vine-leaves, and certainly was not appetising in appearance, besides
being difficult to dispose of gracefully.

it was followed by a whole lamb fried in oil, stuffed with pounded
pistachio nuts, pepper, nutmeg, and coriander seeds, and liberally
besprinkled with rose-water and musk.

only horace had sufficient courage to attack the lamb--and he found
reason to regret it. afterwards came fowls stuffed with raisins,
parsley, and crumbled bread, and the banquet ended with pastry of weird
forms and repellent aspect.

"i hope," said horace, anxiously, "you don't find this eastern cookery
very--er--unpalatable?"--he himself was feeling distinctly unwell: "it's
rather a change from the ordinary routine."

"i have made a truly wonderful dinner, thank you," replied the
professor, not, it is to be feared, without intention. "even in the east
i have eaten nothing approaching this."

"but where did your landlady pick up this extraordinary cooking, my dear
horace?" said mrs. futvoye. "i thought you said she was merely a plain
cook. has she ever lived in the east?"

"not exactly _in_ the east," exclaimed horace; "not what you would call
_living_ there. the fact is," he continued, feeling that he was in
danger of drivelling, and that he had better be as candid as he could,
"this dinner _wasn't_ cooked by her. she--she was obliged to go away
quite suddenly. so the dinner was all sent in by--by a sort of
contractor, you know. he supplies the whole thing, waiters and all."

"i was thinking," said the professor, "that for a bachelor--an _engaged_
bachelor--you seemed to maintain rather a large establishment."

"oh, they're only here for the evening, sir," said horace. "capital
fellows--more picturesque than the local greengrocer--and they don't
breathe on the top of your head."

"they're perfect dears, horace," remarked sylvia; "only--well, just a
_little_ creepy-crawly to look at!"

"it would ill become me to criticise the style and method of our
entertainment," put in the professor, acidly, "otherwise i might be
tempted to observe that it scarcely showed that regard for economy which
i should have"

"now, anthony," put in his wife, "don't let us have any fault-finding.
i'm sure horace has done it all delightfully--yes, delightfully; and
even if he _has_ been just a little extravagant, it's not as if he was
obliged to be as economical _now_, you know!"

"my dear," said the professor, "i have yet to learn that the prospect of
an increased income in the remote future is any justification for
reckless profusion in the present."

"if you only knew," said horace, "you wouldn't call it profusion.
it--it's not at all the dinner i meant it to be, and i'm afraid it
wasn't particularly nice--but it's certainly not expensive."

"expensive is, of course, a very relative term. but i think i have the
right to ask whether this is the footing on which you propose to begin
your married life?"

it was an extremely awkward question, as the reader will perceive. if
ventimore replied--as he might with truth--that he had no intention
whatever of maintaining his wife in luxury such as that, he stood
convicted of selfish indulgence as a bachelor; if, on the other hand, he
declared that he _did_ propose to maintain his wife in the same
fantastic and exaggerated splendour as the present, it would certainly
confirm her father's disbelief in his prudence and economy.

and it was that egregious old ass of a jinnee, as horace thought, with
suppressed rage, who had let him in for all this, and who was now far
beyond all remonstrance or reproach!

before he could bring himself to answer the question, the attendants had
noiselessly removed the tray and stool, and were handing round rosewater
in a silver ewer and basin, the character of which, luckily or
otherwise, turned the professor's inquisitiveness into a different
channel.

"these are not bad--really not bad at all," he said, inspecting the
design. "where did you manage to pick them up?"

"i didn't," said horace; "they're provided by the--the person who
supplies the dinner."

"can you give me his address?" said the professor, scenting a bargain;
"because really, you know, these things are probably antiques--much too
good to be used for business purposes."

"i'm wrong," said horace, lamely; "these particular things are--are lent
by an eccentric oriental gentleman, as a great favour."

"do i know him? is he a collector of such things?"

"you wouldn't have met him; he--he's lived a very retired life of late."

"i should very much like to see his collection. if you could give me a
letter of introduction"

"no," said horace, in a state of prickly heat; "it wouldn't be any use.
his collection is never shown. he--he's a most peculiar man. and just
now he's abroad."

"ah! pardon me if i've been indiscreet; but i concluded from what you
said that this--ah--banquet was furnished by a professional caterer."

"oh, the banquet? yes, _that_ came from the stores," said horace,
mendaciously. "the--the oriental cookery department. they've just
started it, you know; so--so i thought i'd give them a trial. but it's
not what i call properly organised yet."

the slaves were now, with low obeisances, inviting them to seat
themselves on the divan which lined part of the hall.

"ha!" said the professor, as he rose from his cushion, cracking audibly,
"so we're to have our coffee and what not over there, hey?... well, my
boy, i shan't be sorry, i confess, to have something to lean my back
against--and a cigar, a mild cigar, will--ah--aid digestion. you _do_
smoke here?"

"smoke?" said horace, "why, of course! all over the place. here," he
said, clapping his hands, which brought an obsequious slave instantly to
his side; "just bring coffee and cigars, will you?"

the slave rolled his brandy-ball eyes in obvious perplexity.

"coffee," said horace; "you must know what coffee is. and cigarettes.
well, _chibouks_, then--'hubble-bubbles'--if that's what you call them."

but the slave clearly did not understand, and it suddenly struck horace
that, since 'tobacco and coffee were not introduced, even in the east,
till long after the jinnee's time, he, as the founder of the feast,
would naturally be unaware how indispensable they had become at the
present day.

"i'm really awfully sorry," he said; "but they don't seem to have
provided any. i shall speak to the manager about it. and, unfortunately,
i don't know where my own cigars are."

"it's of no consequence," said the professor, with the sort of stoicism
that minds very much. "i am a moderate smoker at best, and turkish
coffee, though delicious, is apt to keep me awake. but if you could let
me have a look at that brass bottle you got at poor collingham's sale, i
should be obliged to you."

horace had no idea where it was then, nor could he, until the professor
came to the rescue with a few words of arabic, manage to make the slaves
comprehend what he wished them to find.

at length, however, two of them appeared, bearing the brass bottle with
every sign of awe, and depositing it at ventimore's feet.

professor futvoye, after wiping and adjusting his glasses, proceeded to
examine the vessel. "it certainly is a most unusual type of brassware,"
he said, "as unique in its way as the silver ewer and basin; and, as you
thought, there does seem to be something resembling an inscription on
the cap, though in this dim light it is almost impossible to be sure."

while he was poring over it, horace seated himself on the divan by
sylvia's side, hoping for one of the whispered conversations permitted
to affianced lovers; he had pulled through the banquet somehow, and on
the whole he felt thankful things had not gone off worse. the noiseless
and uncanny attendants, whom he did not know whether to regard as
efreets, or demons, or simply illusions, but whose services he had no
wish to retain, had all withdrawn. mrs. futvoye was peacefully
slumbering, and her husband was in a better humour than he had been all
the evening.

suddenly from behind the hangings of one of the archways came strange,
discordant sounds, barbaric janglings and thumpings, varied by yowls as
of impassioned cats.

sylvia drew involuntarily closer to horace; her mother woke with a
start, and the professor looked up from the brass bottle with returning
irritation.

"what's this? what's this?" he demanded; "some fresh surprise in store
for us?"

it was quite as much of a surprise for horace, but he was spared the
humiliation of owning it by the entrance of some half-dozen dusky
musicians swathed in white and carrying various strangely fashioned
instruments, with which they squatted down in a semi-circle by the
opposite wall, and began to twang, and drub, and squall with the
complacent cacophony of an eastern orchestra. clearly fakrash was
determined that nothing should be wanting to make the entertainment a
complete success.

"what a very extraordinary noise!" said mrs. futvoye; "surely they can't
mean it for music?"

"yes, they do," said horace; "it--it's really more harmonious than it
sounds--you have to get accustomed to the--er--notation. when you do,
it's rather soothing than otherwise."

"i dare say," said the poor lady. "and do _they_ come from the stores,
too?"

"no," said horace, with a fine assumption of candour, "they don't; they
come from--the arab encampment at earl's court--parties and _fêtes_
attended, you know. but they play _here_ for nothing; they--they want to
get their name known, you see; very deserving and respectable set of
fellows."

"my dear horace!" remarked mrs. futvoye, "if they expect to get
engagements for parties and so on, they really ought to try and learn a
tune of _some_ sort."

"i understand, horace," whispered sylvia, "it's very naughty of you to
have gone to all this trouble and expense (for, of course, it _has_ cost
you a lot) just to please us; but, whatever, dad may say, i love you all
the better for doing it!"

and her hand stole softly into his, and he felt that he could forgive
fakrash everything, even--even the orchestra.

but there was something unpleasantly spectral about their shadowy forms,
which showed in grotesquely baggy and bulgy shapes in the uncertain
light. some of them wore immense and curious white head-dresses, which
gave them the appearance of poulticed thumbs; and they all went on
scraping and twiddling and caterwauling with a doleful monotony that
horace felt must be getting on his guests' nerves, as it certainly was
on his own.

he did not know how to get rid of them, but he sketched a kind of
gesture in the air, intended to intimate that, while their efforts had
afforded the keenest pleasure to the company generally, they were
unwilling to monopolise them any longer, and the artists were at liberty
to retire.

perhaps there is no art more liable to misconstruction than pantomime;
certainly, ventimore's efforts in this direction were misunderstood, for
the music became wilder, louder, more aggressively and abominably out of
tune--and then a worse thing happened.

for the curtains separated, and, heralded by sharp yelps from the
performers, a female figure floated into the hall and began to dance
with a slow and sinuous grace.

her beauty, though of a pronounced oriental type, was unmistakable, even
in the subdued light which fell on her; her diaphanous robe indicated a
faultless form; her dark tresses were braided with sequins; she had the
long, lustrous eyes, the dusky cheeks artificially whitened, and the
fixed scarlet smile of the eastern dancing-girl of all time.

and she paced the floor with her tinkling feet, writhing and undulating
like some beautiful cobra, while the players worked themselves up to yet
higher and higher stages of frenzy.

ventimore, as he sat there looking helplessly on, felt a return of his
resentment against the jinnee. it was really too bad of him; he ought,
at his age, to have known better!

not that there was anything objectionable in the performance itself; but
still, it was _not_ the kind of entertainment for such an occasion.
horace wished now he had mentioned to fakrash who the guests were whom
he expected, and then perhaps even the jinnee would have exercised more
tact in his arrangements.

"and does this girl come from earl's court?" inquired mrs. futvoye, who
was now thoroughly awake.

"oh dear, no," said horace; "i engaged _her_ at--at harrod's--the
entertainment bureau. they told me there she was rather good--struck out
a line of her own, don't you know. but perfectly correct; she--she only
does this to support an invalid aunt."

these statements were, as he felt even in making them, not only
gratuitous, but utterly unconvincing, but he had arrived at that
condition in which a man discovers with terror the unsuspected amount of
mendacity latent in his system.

"i should have thought there were other ways of supporting invalid
aunts," remarked mrs. futvoye. "what is this young lady's name?"

"tinkler," said horace, on the spur of the moment. "miss clementine
tinkler."

"but surely she is a foreigner?"

"mademoiselle, i ought to have said. and tinkla--with an 'a,' you know.
i believe her mother was of arabian extraction--but i really don't
know," explained horace, conscious that sylvia had withdrawn her hand
from his, and was regarding him with covert anxiety.

"i really _must_ put a stop to this," he thought.

"you're getting bored by all this, darling," he said aloud; "so am i.
i'll tell them to go." and he rose and held out his hand as a sign that
the dance should cease.

it ceased at once; but, to his unspeakable horror, the dancer crossed
the floor with a swift jingling rush, and sank in a gauzy heap at his
feet, seizing his hand in both hers and covering it with kisses, while
she murmured speeches in some tongue unknown to him.

"is this a usual feature in miss tinkla's entertainments, may i ask?"
said mrs. futvoye, bristling with not unnatural indignation.

"i really don't know," said the unhappy horace; "i can't make out what
she's saying."

"if i understand her rightly," said the professor, "she is addressing
you as the 'light of her eyes and the vital spirit of her heart.'"

"oh!" said horace, "she's quite mistaken, you know. it--it's the
emotional artist temperament--they don't _mean_ anything by it. my--my
dear young lady," he added, "you've danced most delightfully, and i'm
sure we're all most deeply indebted to you; but we won't detain you any
longer. professor," he added, as she made no offer to rise, "_will_ you
kindly explain to them in arabic that i should be obliged by their going
at once?"

the professor said a few words, which had the desired effect. the girl
gave a little scream and scudded through the archway, and the musicians
seized their instruments and scuttled after her.

"i am so sorry," said horace, whose evening seemed to him to have been
chiefly spent in apologies; "it's not at all the kind of entertainment
one would expect from a place like whiteley's."

"by no means," agreed the professor; "but i understood you to say miss
tinkla was recommended to you by harrod's?"

"very likely, sir," said horace; "but that doesn't affect the case. i
shouldn't expect it from _them_."

"probably they don't know how shamelessly that young person conducts
herself," said mrs. futvoye. "and i think it only right that they should
be told."

"i shall complain, of course," said horace. "i shall put it very
strongly."

"a protest would have more weight coming from a woman," said mrs.
futvoye; "and, as a shareholder in the company, i shall feel bound"

"no, i wouldn't," said horace; "in fact, you mustn't. for, now i come to
think of it, she didn't come from harrod's, after all, or whiteley's
either."

"then perhaps you will be good enough to inform us where she _did_ come
from?"

"i would if i knew," said horace; "but i don't."

"what!" cried the professor, sharply, "do you mean to say you can't
account for the existence of a dancing-girl who--in my daughter's
presence--kisses your hand and addresses you by endearing epithets?"

"oriental metaphor!" said horace. "she was a little overstrung. of
course, if i had had any idea she would make such a scene as that
sylvia," he broke off, "_you_ don't doubt me?"

"no, horace," said sylvia, simply, "i'm sure you must have _some_
explanation--only i do think it would be better if you gave it."

"if i _told_ you the truth," said horace, slowly, "you would none of you
believe me!"

"then you admit," put in the professor, "that hitherto you have _not_
been telling the truth?"

"not as invariably as i could have wished," horace confessed.

"so i suspected. then, unless you can bring yourself to be perfectly
candid, you can hardly wonder at our asking you to consider your
engagement as broken off?"

"broken off!" echoed horace. "sylvia, you won't give me up! you _know_ i
wouldn't do anything unworthy of you!"

"i'm certain that you can't have done anything which would make me love
you one bit the less if i knew it. so why not be quite open with us?"

"because, darling," said horace, "i'm in such a fix that it would only
make matters worse."

"in that case," said the professor, "and as it is already rather late,
perhaps you will allow one of your numerous retinue to call a
four-wheeler?"

horace clapped his hands, but no one answered the summons, and he could
not find any of the slaves in the antechamber.

"i'm afraid all the servants have left," he explained; and it is to be
feared he would have added that they were all obliged to return to the
contractor by eleven, only he caught the professor's eye and decided
that he had better refrain. "if you will wait here, i'll go out and
fetch a cab," he added.

"there is no occasion to trouble you," said the professor; "my wife and
daughter have already got their things on, and we will walk until we
find a cab. now, mr. ventimore, we will bid you good-night and good-bye.
for, after what has happened, you will, i trust, have the good taste to
discontinue your visits and make no attempt to see sylvia again."

"upon my honour," protested horace, "i have done nothing to warrant you
in shutting your doors against me."

"i am unable to agree with you. i have never thoroughly approved of your
engagement, because, as i told you at the time, i suspected you of
recklessness in money matters. even in accepting your invitation
to-night i warned you, as you may remember, not to make the occasion an
excuse for foolish extravagance. i come here, and find you in apartments
furnished and decorated (as you informed us) by yourself, and on a scale
which would be prodigal in a millionaire. you have a suite of retainers
which (except for their nationality and imperfect discipline) a prince
might envy. you provide a banquet of--hem!--delicacies which must have
cost you infinite trouble and unlimited expense--this, after i had
expressly stipulated for a quiet family dinner! not content with that,
you procure for our diversion arab music and dancing of a--of a highly
recondite character. i should be unworthy of the name of father, sir,
if i were to entrust my only daughter's happiness to a young man with so
little common sense, so little self-restraint. and she will understand
my motives and obey my wishes."

"you're right, professor, according to your lights," admitted horace.
"and yet--confound it all!--you're utterly wrong, too!"

"oh, horace," cried sylvia; "if you had only listened to dad, and not
gone to all this foolish, foolish expense, we might have been so happy!"

"but i have gone to no expense. all this hasn't cost me a penny!"

"ah, there _is_ some mystery! horace, if you love me, you will
explain--here, now, before it's too late!"

"my darling," groaned horace, "i would, like a shot, if i thought it
would be of the least use!"

"hitherto," said the professor, "you cannot be said to have been happy
in your explanations--and i should advise you not to venture on any
more. good-night, once more. i only wish it were possible, without
needless irony, to make the customary acknowledgments for a pleasant
evening."

mrs. futvoye had already hurried her daughter away, and, though she had
left her husband to express his sentiments unaided, she made it
sufficiently clear that she entirely agreed with them.

horace stood in the outer hall by the fountain, in which his drowned
chrysanthemums were still floating, and gazed in stupefied despair after
his guests as they went down the path to the gate. he knew only too well
that they would never cross his threshold, nor he theirs, again.

suddenly he came to himself with a start. "i'll try it!" he cried. "i
can't and won't stand this!" and he rushed after them bareheaded.

"professor!" he said breathlessly, as he caught him up, "one moment. on
second thoughts, i _will_ tell you my secret, if you will promise me a
patient hearing."

"the pavement is hardly the place for confidences," replied the
professor, "and, if it were, your costume is calculated to attract more
remark than is desirable. my wife and daughter have gone on--if you will
permit me, i will overtake them--i shall be at home to-morrow morning,
should you wish to see me."

"no--to-night, to-night!" urged horace. "i can't sleep in that infernal
place with this on my mind. put mrs. futvoye and sylvia into a cab,
professor, and come back. it's not late, and i won't keep you long--but
for heaven's sake, let me tell you my story at once."

probably the professor was not without some curiosity on the subject; at
all events he yielded. "very well," he said, "go into the house and i
will rejoin you presently. only remember," he added, "that i shall
accept no statement without the fullest proof. otherwise you will merely
be wasting your time and mine."

"proof!" thought horace, gloomily, as he returned to his arabian halls,
"the only decent proof i could produce would be old fakrash, and he's
not likely to turn up again--especially now i want him."

a little later the professor returned, having found a cab and despatched
his women-folk home. "now, young man," he said, as he unwound his
wrapper and seated himself on the divan by horace's side, "i can give
you just ten minutes to tell your story in, so let me beg you to make it
as brief and as comprehensible as you can."

it was not exactly an encouraging invitation in the circumstances, but
horace took his courage in both hands and told him everything, just as
it had happened.

"and that's your story?" said the professor, after listening to the
narrative with the utmost attention, when horace came to the end.

"that's my story, sir," said horace. "and i hope it has altered your
opinion of me."

"it has," replied the professor, in an altered tone; "it has indeed.
yours is a sad case--a very sad case."

"it's rather awkward, isn't it? but i don't mind so long as you
understand. and you'll tell sylvia--as much as you think proper?"

"yes--yes; i must tell sylvia."

"and i may go on seeing her as usual?"

"well--will you be guided by my advice--the advice of one who has lived
more than double your years?"

"certainly," said horace.

"then, if i were you, i should go away at once, for a complete change of
air and scene."

"that's impossible, sir--you forget my work!"

"never mind your work, my boy: leave it for a while, try a sea-voyage,
go round the world, get quite away from these associations."

"but i might come across the jinnee again," objected horace; "_he's_
travelling, as i told you."

"yes, yes, to be sure. still, i should go away. consult any doctor, and
he'll tell you the same thing."

"consult any good god!" cried horace; "i see what it is--you think
i'm mad!"

"no, no, my dear boy," said the professor, soothingly, "not mad--nothing
of the sort; perhaps your mental equilibrium is just a trifle--it's
quite intelligible. you see, the sudden turn in your professional
prospects, coupled with your engagement to sylvia--i've known stronger
minds than yours thrown off their balance--temporarily, of course, quite
temporarily--by less than that."

"you believe i am suffering from delusions?"

"i don't say that. i think you may see ordinary things in a distorted
light."

"anyhow, you don't believe there really was a jinnee inside that
bottle?"

"remember, you yourself assured me at the time you opened it that you
found nothing whatever inside it. isn't it more credible that you were
right then than that you should be right now?"

"well," said horace, "you saw all those black slaves; you ate, or tried
to eat, that unutterably beastly banquet; you heard that music--and then
there was the dancing-girl. and this hall we're in, this robe i've got
on--are _they_ delusions? because if they are, i'm afraid you will have
to admit that _you're_ mad too."

"ingeniously put," said the professor. "i fear it is unwise to argue
with you. still, i will venture to assert that a strong imagination like
yours, over-heated and saturated with oriental ideas--to which i fear i
may have contributed--is not incapable of unconsciously assisting in its
own deception. in other words, i think that you may have provided all
this yourself from various quarters without any clear recollection of
the fact."

"that's very scientific and satisfactory as far as it goes, my dear
professor," said horace; "but there's one piece of evidence which may
upset your theory--and that's this brass bottle."

"if your reasoning powers were in their normal condition," said the
professor, compassionately, "you would see that the mere production of
an empty bottle can be no proof of what it contained--or, for that
matter, that it ever contained anything at all!"

"oh, i see _that_," said horace; "but _this_ bottle has a stopper with
what you yourself admit to be an inscription of some sort. suppose that
inscription confirms my story--what then? all i ask you to do is to make
it out for yourself before you decide that i'm either a liar or a
lunatic."

"i warn you," said the professor, "that if you are trusting to my being
unable to decipher the inscription, you are deceiving yourself. you
represent that this bottle belongs to the period of solomon--that is,
about a thousand years b.c. probably you are not aware that the earliest
specimens of oriental metal-work in existence are not older than the
tenth century of our era. but, granting that it is as old as you allege,
i shall certainly be able to read any inscription there may be on it. i
have made out clay tablets in cuneiform which were certainly written a
thousand years before solomon's time."

"so much the better," said horace. "i'm as certain as i can be that,
whatever is written on that lid--whether it's phoenician, or cuneiform,
or anything else--must have some reference to a jinnee confined in the
bottle, or at least bear the seal of solomon. but there the thing
is--examine it for yourself."

"not now," said the professor; "it's too late, and the light here is not
strong enough. but i'll tell you what i will do. i'll take this stopper
thing home with me, and examine it carefully to-morrow--on one
condition."

"you have only to name it," said horace.

"my condition is, that if i, and one or two other orientalists to whom i
may submit it, come to the conclusion that there is no real inscription
at all--or, if any, that a date and meaning must be assigned to it
totally inconsistent with your story--you will accept our finding and
acknowledge that you have been under a delusion, and dismiss the whole
affair from your mind."

"oh, i don't mind agreeing to _that_," said horace, "particularly as
it's my only chance."

"very well, then," said the professor, as he removed the metal cap and
put it in his pocket; "you may depend upon hearing from me in a day or
two. meantime, my boy," he continued, almost affectionately, "why not
try a short bicycle tour somewhere, hey? you're a cyclist, i
know--anything but allow yourself to dwell on oriental subjects."

"it's not so easy to avoid dwelling on them as you think!" said horace,
with rather a dreary laugh. "and i fancy, professor, that--whether you
like it or not--you'll have to believe in that jinnee of mine sooner or
later."

"i can scarcely conceive," replied the professor, who was by this time
at the outer door, "any degree of evidence which could succeed in
convincing me that your brass bottle had ever contained an arabian
jinnee. however, i shall endeavour to preserve an open mind on the
subject. good evening to you."

as soon as he was alone, horace paced up and down his deserted halls in
a state of simmering rage as he thought how eagerly he had looked
forward to his little dinner-party; how intimate and delightful it might
have been, and what a monstrous and prolonged nightmare it had actually
proved. and at the end of it there he was--in a fantastic, impossible
dwelling, deserted by every one, his chances of setting himself right
with sylvia hanging on the slenderest thread; unknown difficulties and
complications threatening him from every side!

he owed all this to fakrash. yes, that incorrigibly grateful jinnee,
with his antiquated notions and his high-flown professions, had
contrived to ruin him more disastrously than if he had been his
bitterest foe! ah! if he could be face to face with him once more--if
only for five minutes--he would be restrained by no false delicacy: he
would tell him fairly and plainly what a meddling, blundering old fool
he was. but fakrash had taken his flight for ever: there were no means
of calling him back--nothing to be done now but go to bed and sleep--if
he could!

exasperated by the sense of his utter helplessness, ventimore went to
the arch which led to his bed-chamber and drew the curtain back with a
furious pull. and just within the archway, standing erect with folded
arms and the smile of fatuous benignity which ventimore was beginning to
know and dread, was the form of fakrash-el-aamash, the jinnee!

chapter x

no place like home!

"may thy head long survive!" said fakrash, by way of salutation, as he
stepped through the archway.

"you're very good," said horace, whose anger had almost evaporated in
the relief of the jinnee's unexpected return, "but i don't think any
head can survive this sort of thing long."

"art thou content with this dwelling i have provided for thee?" inquired
the jinnee, glancing around the stately hall with perceptible
complacency.

it would have been positively brutal to say how very far from contented
he felt, so horace could only mumble that he had never been lodged like
that before in all his life.

"it is far below thy deserts," fakrash observed graciously. "and were
thy friends amazed at the manner of their entertainment?"

"they were," said horace.

"a sure method of preserving friends is to feast them with liberality,"
remarked the jinnee.

this was rather more than horace's temper could stand. "you were kind
enough to provide my friends with such a feast," he said, "that they'll
never come _here_ again."

"how so? were not the meats choice and abounding in fatness? was not the
wine sweet, and the sherbet like unto perfumed snow?"

"oh, everything was--er--as nice as possible," said horace. "couldn't
have been better."

"yet thou sayest that thy friends will return no more--for what reason?"

"well, you see," explained horace, reluctantly, "there's such a thing
as doing people _too_ well. i mean, it isn't everybody that appreciates
arabian cooking. but they might have stood that. it was the dancing-girl
that did for me."

"i commanded that a houri, lovelier than the full moon, and graceful as
a young gazelle, should appear for the delight of thy guests."

"she came," said horace, gloomily.

"acquaint me with that which hath occurred--for i perceive plainly that
something hath fallen out contrary to thy desires."

"well," said horace, "if it had been a bachelor party, there would have
been no harm in the houri; but, as it happened, two of my guests were
ladies, and they--well, they not unnaturally put a wrong construction on
it all."

"verily," exclaimed the jinnee, "thy words are totally incomprehensible
to me."

"i don't know what the custom may be in arabia," said horace, "but with
us it is not usual for a man to engage a houri to dance after dinner to
amuse the lady he is proposing to marry. it's the kind of attention
she'd be most unlikely to appreciate.

"then was one of thy guests the damsel whom thou art seeking to marry?"

"she was," said horace, "and the other two were her father and mother.
from which you may imagine that it was not altogether agreeable for me
when your gazelle threw herself at my feet and hugged my knees and
declared that i was the light of her eyes. of course, it all meant
nothing--it's probably the conventional behaviour for a gazelle, and i'm
not reflecting upon her in the least. but, in the circumstances, it
_was_ compromising."

"i thought," said fakrash, "that thou assuredst me that thou wast not
contracted to any damsel?"

"i think i only said that there was no one whom i would trouble you to
procure as a wife for me," replied horace; "i certainly was
engaged--though, after this evening, my engagement is at an end--unless
... that reminds me, do you happen to know whether there really _was_ an
inscription on the seal of your bottle, and what it said?"

"i know naught of any inscription," said the jinnee; "bring me the seal
that i may see it."

"i haven't got it by me at this moment," said horace; "i lent it to my
friend--the father of this young lady i told you of. you see, mr.
fakrash, you got me into--i mean, i was in such a hole over this affair
that i was obliged to make a clean breast of it to him. and he wouldn't
believe it, so it struck me that there might be an inscription of some
sort on the seal, saying who you were, and why solomon had you confined
in the bottle. then the professor would be obliged to admit that there's
something in my story."

"truly, i wonder at thee and at the smallness of thy penetration," the
jinnee commented; "for if there were indeed any writing upon this seal,
it is not possible that one of thy race should be able to decipher it."

"oh, i beg your pardon," said horace; "professor futvoye is an oriental
scholar; he can make out any inscription, no matter how many thousands
of years old it may be. if anything's there, he'll decipher it. the
question is whether anything _is_ there."

the effect of this speech on fakrash was as unexpected as it was
inexplicable: the jinnee's features, usually so mild, began to work
convulsively until they became terrible to look at, and suddenly, with a
fierce howl, he shot up to nearly double his ordinary stature.

"o thou of little sense and breeding!" he cried, in a loud voice; "how
camest thou to deliver the bottle in which i was confined into the hands
of this learned man?"

ventimore, startled as he was, did not lose his self-possession. "my
dear sir," he said, "i did not suppose you could have any further use
for it. and, as a matter of fact, i didn't give professor futvoye the
bottle--which is over there in the corner--but merely the stopper. i
wish you wouldn't tower over me like that--it gives me a crick in the
neck to talk to you. why on earth should you make such a fuss about my
lending the seal; what possible difference can it make to you even if it
does confirm my story? and it's of immense importance to _me_ that the
professor should believe i told the truth."

"i spoke in haste," said the jinnee, slowly resuming his normal size,
and looking slightly ashamed of his recent outburst as well as
uncommonly foolish. "the bottle truly is of no value; and as for the
stopper, since it is but lent, it is no great matter. if there be any
legend upon the seal, perchance this learned man of whom thou speakest
will by this time have deciphered it?"

"no," said horace, "he won't tackle it till to-morrow. and it's as
likely as not that when he does he won't find any reference to
_you_--and i shall be up a taller tree than ever!"

"art thou so desirous that he should receive proof that thy story is
true?"

"why, of course i am! haven't i been saying so all this time?"

"who can satisfy him so surely as i?"

"you!" cried horace. "do you mean to say you really would? mr. fakrash,
you _are_ an old brick! that would be the very thing!"

"there is naught," said the jinnee, smiling indulgently, "that i would
not do to promote thy welfare, for thou hast rendered me inestimable
service. acquaint me therefore with the abode of this sage, and i will
present myself before him, and if haply he should find no inscription
upon the seal, or its purport should be hidden from him, then will i
convince him that thou hast spoken the truth and no lie."

horace very willingly gave him the professor's address. "only don't
drop in on him to-night, you know," he thought it prudent to add, "or
you might startle him. call any time after breakfast to-morrow, and
you'll find him in."

"to-night," said fakrash, "i return to pursue my search after suleyman
(on whom be peace!). for not yet have i found him."

"if you _will_ try to do so many things at once," said horace, "i don't
see how you can expect much result."

"at nineveh they knew him not--for where i left a city i found but a
heap of ruins, tenanted by owls and bats."

"_they say the lion and the lizard keep the courts_" murmured
horace, half to himself. "i was afraid you might be disappointed with
nineveh myself. why not run over to sheba? you might hear of him there."

"seba of el-yemen--the country of bilkees, the queen beloved of
suleyman," said the jinnee. "it is an excellent suggestion, and i will
follow it without delay."

"but you won't forget to look in on professor futvoye to-morrow, will
you?"

"assuredly i will not. and now, ere i depart, tell me if there be any
other service i may render thee."

horace hesitated. "there _is_ just one," he said, "only i'm afraid
you'll be offended if i mention it."

"on the head and the eye be thy commands!" said the jinnee; "for
whatsoever thou desirest shall be accomplished, provided that it lie
within my power to perform it."

"well," said horace, "if you're sure you don't mind, i'll tell you.
you've transformed this house into a wonderful place, more like the
alhambra--i don't mean the one in leicester square--than a london
lodging-house. but then i am only a lodger here, and the people the
house belongs to--excellent people in their way--would very much rather
have the house as it was. they have a sort of idea that they won't be
able to let these rooms as easily as the others."

"base and sordid dogs!" said the jinnee, with contempt.

"possibly," said horace, "it's narrow-minded of them--but that's the way
they look at it. they've actually left rather than stay here. and it's
_their_ house--not mine."

"if they abandon this dwelling, thou wilt remain in the more secure
possession."

"oh, _shall_ i, though? they'll go to law and have me turned out, and i
shall have to pay ruinous damages into the bargain. so, you see, what
you intended as a kindness will only bring me bad luck."

"come--without more words--to the statement of thy request," said
fakrash, "for i am in haste."

"all i want you to do," replied horace, in some anxiety as to what the
effect of his request would be, "is to put everything here back to what
it was before. it won't take you a minute."

"of a truth," exclaimed fakrash, "to bestow a favour upon thee is but a
thankless undertaking, for not once, but twice, hast thou rejected my
benefits--and now, behold, i am at a loss to devise means to gratify
thee!"

"i know i've abused your good nature," said horace; "but if you'll only
do this, and then convince the professor that my story is true, i shall
be more than satisfied. i'll never ask another favour of you!"

"my benevolence towards thee hath no bounds--as thou shalt see; and i
can deny thee nothing, for truly thou art a worthy and temperate young
man. farewell, then, and be it according to thy desire."

he raised his arms above his head, and shot up like a rocket towards the
lofty dome, which split asunder to let him pass. horace, as he gazed
after him, had a momentary glimpse of deep blue sky, with a star or two
that seemed to be hurrying through the transparent opal scud, before
the roof closed in once more.

then came a low, rumbling sound, with a shock like a mild earthquake:
the slender pillars swayed under their horseshoe arches; the big
hanging-lanterns went out; the walls narrowed, and the floor heaved and
rose--till ventimore found himself up in his own familiar sitting-room
once more, in the dark. outside he could see the great square still
shrouded in grey haze--the street lamps flickering in the wind; a
belated reveller was beguiling his homeward way by rattling his stick
against the railings as he passed.

inside the room everything was exactly as before, and horace found it
difficult to believe that a few minutes earlier he had been standing on
that same site, but twenty feet or so below his present level, in a
spacious blue-tiled hall, with a domed ceiling and gaudy pillared
arches.

but he was very far from regretting his short-lived splendour; he burnt
with shame and resentment whenever he thought of that nightmare banquet,
which was so unlike the quiet, unpretentious little dinner he had looked
forward to.

however, it was over now, and it was useless to worry himself about what
could not be helped. besides, fortunately, there was no great harm done;
the jinnee had been brought to see his mistake, and, to do him justice,
had shown himself willing enough to put it right. he had promised to go
and see the professor next day, and the result of the interview could
not fail to be satisfactory. and after this, ventimore thought, fakrash
would have the sense and good feeling not to interfere in his affairs
again.

meanwhile he could sleep now with a mind free from his worst anxieties,
and he went to his room in a spirit of intense thankfulness that he had
a christian bed to sleep in. he took off his gorgeous robes--the only
things that remained to prove to him that the events of that evening had
been no delusion--and locked them in his wardrobe with a sense of
relief that he would never be required to wear them again, and his last
conscious thought before he fell asleep was the comforting reflection
that, if there were any barrier between sylvia and himself, it would be
removed in the course of a very few more hours.

chapter xi

a fool's paradise

ventimore found next morning that his bath and shaving-water had been
brought up, from which he inferred, quite correctly, that his landlady
must have returned.

secretly he was by no means looking forward to his next interview with
her, but she appeared with his bacon and coffee in a spirit so evidently
chastened that he saw that he would have no difficulty so far as she was
concerned.

"i'm sure, mr. ventimore, sir," she began, apologetically, "i don't know
what you must have thought of me and rapkin last night, leaving the
house like we did!"

"it was extremely inconvenient," said horace, "and not at all what i
should have expected from you. but possibly you had some reason for it?"

"why, sir," said mrs. rapkin, running her hand nervously along the back
of a chair, "the fact is, something come over me, and come over rapkin,
as we couldn't stop here another minute not if it was ever so."

"ah!" said horace, raising his eyebrows, "restlessness--eh, mrs. rapkin?
awkward that it should come on just then, though, wasn't it?"

"it was the look of the place, somehow," said mrs. rapkin. "if you'll
believe me, sir, it was all changed like--nothing in it the same from
top to bottom!"

"really?" said horace. "i don't notice any difference myself."

"no more don't i, sir, not by daylight; but last night it was all domes
and harches and marble fountings let into the floor, with parties
moving about downstairs all silent and as black as your hat--which
rapkin saw them as well as what i did."

"from the state your husband was in last night," said horace, "i should
say he was capable of seeing anything--and double of most things."

"i won't deny, sir, that rapkin mayn't have been quite hisself, as a
very little upsets him after he's spent an afternoon studying the papers
and what-not at the libery. but i see the niggers too, mr. ventimore,
and no one can say _i_ ever take more than is good for me."

"i don't suggest that for a moment, mrs. rapkin," said horace; "only, if
the house was as you describe last night, how do you account for its
being all right this morning?"

mrs. rapkin in her embarrassment was reduced to folding her apron into
small pleats. "it's not for me to say, sir," she replied, "but, if i was
to give my opinion, it would be as them parties as called 'ere on camels
the other day was at the bottom of it."

"i shouldn't wonder if you were right, mrs. rapkin," said horace
blandly; "you see, you had been exerting yourself over the cooking, and
no doubt were in an over-excited state, and, as you say, those camels
had taken hold of your imagination until you were ready to see anything
that rapkin saw, and _he_ was ready to see anything _you_ did. it's not
at all uncommon. scientific people, i believe, call it 'collective
hallucination.'"

"law, sir!" said the good woman, considerably impressed by this
diagnosis, "you don't mean to say i had _that_? i was always fanciful
from a girl, and could see things in coffee-grounds as nobody else
could--but i never was took like that before. and to think of me leaving
my dinner half cooked, and you expecting your young lady and her pa and
ma! well, _there_, now, i _am_ sorry. whatever did you do, sir?"

"we managed to get food of sorts from somewhere," said horace, "but it
was most uncomfortable for me, and i trust, mrs. rapkin--i sincerely
trust that it will not occur again."

"that i'll answer for it shan't, sir. and you won't take no notice to
rapkin, sir, will you? though it was his seein' the niggers and that as
put it into my 'ed; but i 'ave spoke to him pretty severe already, and
he's truly sorry and ashamed for forgetting hisself as he did."

"very well, mrs. rapkin," said horace; "we will understand that last
night's--hem--rather painful experience is not to be alluded to
again--on either side."

he felt sincerely thankful to have got out of it so easily, for it was
impossible to say what gossip might not have been set on foot if the
rapkins had not been brought to see the advisability of reticence on the
subject.

"there's one more thing, sir, i wished for to speak to you about," said
mrs. rapkin; "that great brass vawse as you bought at an oction some
time back. i dunno if you remember it?"

"i remember it," said horace. "well, what about it?"

"why, sir, i found it in the coal-cellar this morning, and i thought i'd
ask if that was where you wished it kep' in future. for, though no
amount o' polish could make it what i call a tasty thing, it's neither
horniment nor yet useful where it is at present."

"oh," said horace, rather relieved, for he had an ill-defined dread from
her opening words that the bottle might have been misbehaving itself in
some way. "put it wherever you please, mrs. rapkin; do whatever you like
with it--so long as i don't see the thing again!"

"very good, sir; i on'y thought i'd ask the question," said mrs. rapkin,
as she closed the door upon herself.

altogether, horace walked to great cloister street that morning in a
fairly cheerful mood and amiably disposed, even towards the jinnee. with
all his many faults, he was a thoroughly good-natured old devil--very
superior in every way to the one the arabian nights fisherman found in
_his_ bottle.

"ninety-nine jinn out of a hundred," thought horace, "would have turned
nasty on finding benefit after benefit 'declined with thanks.' but one
good point in fakrash is that he _does_ take a hint in good part, and,
as soon as he can be made to see where he's wrong, he's always ready to
set things right. and he thoroughly understands now that these oriental
dodges of his won't do nowadays, and that when people see a penniless
man suddenly wallowing in riches they naturally want to know how he came
by them. i don't suppose he will trouble me much in future. if he should
look in now and then, i must put up with it. perhaps, if i suggested it,
he wouldn't mind coming in some form that would look less outlandish. if
he would get himself up as a banker, or a bishop--the bishop of bagdad,
say--i shouldn't care how often he called. only, i can't have him coming
down the chimney in either capacity. but he'll see that himself. and
he's done me one real service--i mustn't let myself forget that. he sent
me old wackerbath. by the way, i wonder if he's seen my designs yet, and
what he thinks of them."

he was at his table, engaged in jotting down some rough ideas for the
decoration of the reception-rooms in the projected house, when beevor
came in.

"i've got nothing doing just now," he said; "so i thought i'd come in
and have a squint at those plans of yours, if they're forward enough to
be seen yet."

ventimore had to explain that even the imperfect method of examination
proposed was not possible, as he had despatched the drawings to his
client the night before.

"phew!" said beevor; "that's sharp work, isn't it?"

"i don't know. i've been sticking hard at it for over a fortnight."

"well, you might have given me a chance of seeing what you've made of
it. i let you see all _my_ work!"

"to tell you the honest truth, old fellow, i wasn't at all sure you'd
like it, and i was afraid you'd put me out of conceit with what i'd
done, and wackerbath was in a frantic hurry to have the plans--so there
it was."

"and do you think he'll be satisfied with them?"

"he ought to be. i don't like to be cock-sure, but i believe--i really
do believe--that i've given him rather more than he expected. it's going
to be a devilish good house, though i say it myself."

"something new-fangled and fantastic, eh? well, he mayn't care about it,
you know. when you've had my experience, you'll realise that a client is
a rum bird to satisfy."

"i shall satisfy _my_ old bird," said horace, gaily. "he'll have a cage
he can hop about in to his heart's content."

"you're a clever chap enough," said beevor; "but to carry a big job like
this through you want one thing--and that's ballast."

"not while you heave yours at my head! come, old fellow, you aren't
really riled because i sent off those plans without showing them to you?
i shall soon have them back, and then you can pitch into 'em as much as
you please. seriously, though, i shall want all the help you can spare
when i come to the completed designs."

"'um," said beevor, "you've got along very well alone so far--at least,
by your own account; so i dare say you'll be able to manage without me
to the end. only, you know," he added, as he left the room, "you haven't
won your spurs yet. a fellow isn't necessarily a gilbert scott, or a
norman shaw, or a waterhouse just because he happens to get a
sixty-thousand pound job the first go off!"

"poor old beevor!" thought horace, repentantly, "i've put his back up.
i might just as well have shown him the plans, after all; it wouldn't
have hurt me and it would have pleased _him_. never mind, i'll make my
peace with him after lunch. i'll ask him to give me his idea for a--no,
hang it all, even friendship has its limits!"

he returned from lunch to hear what sounded like an altercation of some
sort in his office, in which, as he neared his door, beevor's voice was
distinctly audible.

"my dear sir," he was saying, "i have already told you that it is no
affair of mine."

"but i ask you, sir, as a brother architect," said another voice,
"whether you consider it professional or reasonable?"

"as a brother architect," replied beevor, as ventimore opened the door,
"i would rather be excused from giving an opinion.... ah, here is mr.
ventimore himself."

horace entered, to find himself confronted by mr. wackerbath, whose face
was purple and whose white whiskers were bristling with rage. "so, sir!"
he began. "so, sir!" and choked ignominiously.

"there appears to have been some misunderstanding, my dear ventimore,"
explained beevor, with a studious correctness which was only a shade
less offensive than open triumph. "i think i'd better leave you and this
gentleman to talk it over quietly."

"quietly?" exclaimed mr. wackerbath, with an apoplectic snort;
"_quietly!!_"

"i've no idea what you are so excited about, sir," said horace. "perhaps
you will explain?"

"explain!" mr. wackerbath gasped; "why--no, if i speak just now, i shall
be ill: _you_ tell him," he added, waving a plump hand in beevor's
direction.

"i'm not in possession of all the facts," said beevor, smoothly; "but,
so far as i can gather, this gentleman thinks that, considering the
importance of the work he intrusted to your hands, you have given less
time to it than he might have expected. as i have told him, that is a
matter which does not concern me, and which he must discuss with you."

so saying, beevor retired to his own room, and shut the door with the
same irreproachable discretion, which conveyed that he was not in the
least surprised, but was too much of a gentleman to show it.

"well, mr. wackerbath," began horace, when they were alone, "so you're
disappointed with the house?"

"disappointed!" said mr. wackerbath, furiously. "i am disgusted, sir,
disgusted!"

horace's heart sank lower still; had he deceived himself after all,
then? had he been nothing but a conceited fool, and--most galling
thought of all--had beevor judged him only too accurately? and yet, no,
he could not believe it--he _knew_ his work was good!

"this is plain speaking with a vengeance," he said; "i'm sorry you're
dissatisfied. i did my best to carry out your instructions."

"oh, you did?" sputtered mr. wackerbath. "that's what you call--but go
on, sir, _go_ on!"

"i got it done as quickly as possible," continued horace, "because i
understood you wished no time to be lost."

"no one can accuse you of dawdling over it. what i should like to know
is how the devil you managed to get it done in the time?"

"i worked incessantly all day and every day," said horace. "that's how i
managed it--and this is all the thanks i get for it!"

"thanks?" mr. wackerbath well-nigh howled. "you--you insolent young
charlatan; you expect thanks!"

"now look here, mr. wackerbath," said horace, whose own temper was
getting a little frayed. "i'm not accustomed to being treated like this,
and i don't intend to submit to it. just tell me--in as moderate
language as you can command--what you object to?"

"i object to the whole damned thing, sir! i mean, i repudiate the entire
concern. it's the work of a raving lunatic--a place that no english
gentleman, sir, with any self-respect or--ah!--consideration for his
reputation and position in the county, could consent to occupy for a
single hour!"

"oh," said horace, feeling deathly sick, "in that case it is useless, of
course, to suggest any modifications."

"absolutely!" said mr. wackerbath.

"very well, then; there's no more to be said," replied horace. "you will
have no difficulty in finding an architect who will be more successful
in realising your intentions. mr. beevor, the gentleman you met just
now," he added, with a touch of bitterness, "would probably be just your
man. of course i retire altogether. and really, if any one is the
sufferer over this, i fancy it's myself. i can't see how you are any the
worse."

"not any the worse?" cried mr. wackerbath, "when the infernal place is
built!"

"built!" echoed horace feebly.

"i tell you, sir, i saw it with my own eyes driving to the station this
morning; my coachman and footman saw it; my wife saw it--damn it, sir,
we _all_ saw it!"

then horace understood. his indefatigable jinnee had been at work again!
of course, for fakrash it must have been what he would term "the easiest
of affairs"--especially after a glance at the plans (and ventimore
remembered that the jinnee had surprised him at work upon them, and even
requested to have them explained to him)--to dispense with contractors
and bricklayers and carpenters, and construct the entire building in the
course of a single night.

it was a generous and spirited action--but, particularly now that the
original designs had been found faulty and rejected, it placed the
unfortunate architect in a most invidious position.

"well, sir," said mr. wackerbath, with elaborate irony, "i presume it
is you whom i have to thank for improving my land by erecting this
precious palace on it?"

"i--i" began horace, utterly broken down; and then he saw, with
emotions that may be imagined, the jinnee himself, in his green robes,
standing immediately behind mr. wackerbath.

"greeting to you," said fakrash, coming forward with his smile of
amiable cunning. "if i mistake not," he added, addressing the startled
estate agent, who had jumped visibly, "thou art the merchant for whom my
son here," and he laid a hand on horace's shrinking shoulder, "undertook
to construct a mansion?"

"i am," said mr. wackerbath, in some mystification. "have i the pleasure
of addressing mr. ventimore, senior?"

"no, no," put in horace; "no relation. he's a sort of informal partner."

"hast thou not found him an architect of divine gifts?" inquired the
jinnee, beaming with pride. "is not the palace that he hath raised for
thee by his transcendent accomplishments a marvel of beauty and
stateliness, and one that sultans might envy?"

"no, sir!" shouted the infuriated mr. wackerbath; "since you ask my
opinion, it's nothing of the sort! it's a ridiculous tom-fool cross
between the palm-house at kew and the brighton pavilion! there's no
billiard-room, and not a decent bedroom in the house. i've been all over
it, so i ought to know; and as for drainage, there isn't a sign of it.
and he has the brass--ah, i should say, the unblushing effrontery--to
call that a country house!"

horace's dismay was curiously shot with relief. the jinnee, who was
certainly very far from being a genius except by courtesy, had taken it
upon himself to erect the palace according to his own notions of arabian
domestic luxury--and horace, taught by bitter experience, could
sympathise to some extent with his unfortunate client. on the other
hand, it was balm to his smarting self-respect to find that it was not
his own plans, after all, which had been found so preposterous; and, by
some obscure mental process, which i do not propose to explain, he
became reconciled, and almost grateful, to the officious fakrash. and
then, too, he was _his_ jinnee, and horace had no intention of letting
him be bullied by an outsider.

"let me explain, mr. wackerbath," he said. "personally i've had nothing
to do with this. this gentleman, wishing to spare me the trouble, has
taken upon himself to build your house for you, without consulting
either of us, and, from what i know of his powers in the direction, i've
no doubt that--that it's a devilish fine place, in its way. anyhow, we
make no charge for it--he presents it to you as a free gift. why not
accept it as such and make the best of it?"

"make the best of it?" stormed mr. wackerbath. "stand by and see the
best site in three counties defaced by a jimcrack moorish nightmare like
that! why, they'll call it 'wackerbath's folly,' sir. i shall be the
laughing-stock of the neighbourhood. i can't live in the beastly
building. i couldn't afford to keep it up, and i won't have it cumbering
my land. do you hear? _i won't!_ i'll go to law, cost me what it may,
and compel you and your arabian friends there to pull the thing down.
i'll take the case up to the house of lords, if necessary, and fight you
as long as i can stand!"

"as long as thou canst stand!" repeated fakrash, gently. "that is a long
time truly, o thou litigious one!... on all fours, ungrateful dog that
thou art!" he cried, with an abrupt and entire change of manner, "and
crawl henceforth for the remainder of thy days. i, fakrash-el-aamash,
command thee!"

it was both painful and grotesque to see the portly and intensely
respectable mr. wackerbath suddenly drop forward on his hands while
desperately striving to preserve his dignity. "how dare you, sir?" he
almost barked, "how _dare_ you, i say? are you aware that i could summon
you for this? let me up. i _insist_ upon getting up!"

"o contemptible in aspect!" replied the jinnee, throwing open the door.
"begone to thy kennel."

"i won't! i can't!" whimpered the unhappy man. "how do you expect
me--me!--to cross westminster bridge on all fours? what will the
officials think at waterloo, where i have been known and respected for
years? how am i to face my family in--in this position? do, for mercy's
sake, let me get up!"

horace had been too shocked and startled to speak before, but now
humanity, coupled with disgust for the jinnee's high-handed methods,
compelled him to interfere. "mr. fakrash," he said, "this has gone far
enough. unless you stop tormenting this unfortunate gentleman, i've done
with you."

"never," said fakrash. "he hath dared to abuse my palace, which is far
too sumptuous a dwelling for such a son of a burnt dog as he. therefore,
i will make his abode to be in the dust for ever."

"but i _don't_ find fault," yelped poor mr. wackerbath. "you--you
entirely misunderstood the--the few comments i ventured to make. it's a
capital mansion, handsome, and yet 'homey,' too. i'll never say another
word against it. i'll--yes, i'll _live_ in it--if only you'll let me
up?"

"do as he asks you," said horace to the jinnee, "or i swear i'll never
speak to you again."

"thou art the arbiter of this matter," was the reply. "and if i yield,
it is at thy intercession, and not his. rise then," he said to the
humiliated client; "depart, and show us the breadth of thy shoulders."

it was this precise moment which beevor, who was probably unable to
restrain his curiosity any longer, chose to re-enter the room. "oh,
ventimore," he began, "did i leave my?... i beg your pardon. i
thought you were alone again."

"don't go, sir," said mr. wackerbath, as he scrambled awkwardly to his
feet, his usually florid face mottled in grey and lilac. "i--i should
like you to know that, after talking things quietly over with your
friend mr. ventimore and his partner here, i am thoroughly convinced
that my objections were quite untenable. i retract all i said.
the house is--ah--admirably planned: _most_ convenient, roomy,
and--ah--unconventional. the--the entire freedom from all sanitary
appliances is a particular recommendation. in short, i am more than
satisfied. pray forget anything i may have said which might be taken to
imply the contrary.... gentlemen, good afternoon!"

he bowed himself past the jinnee in a state of deference and
apprehension, and was heard stumbling down the staircase. horace hardly
dared to meet beevor's eyes, which were fixed upon the green-turbaned
jinnee, as he stood apart in dreamy abstraction, smiling placidly to
himself.

"i say," beevor said to horace, at last, in an undertone, "you never
told me you had gone into partnership."

"he's not a regular partner," whispered ventimore; "he does odd things
for me occasionally, that's all."

"he soon managed to smooth your client down," remarked beevor.

"yes," said horace; "he's an oriental, you see, and, he has a--a very
persuasive manner. would you like to be introduced?"

"if it's all the same to you," replied beevor, still below his voice,
"i'd rather be excused. to tell you the truth, old fellow, i don't
altogether fancy the looks of him, and it's my opinion," he added, "that
the less you have to do with him the better. he strikes me as a
wrong'un, old man."

"no, no," said horace; "eccentric, that's all--you don't understand
him."

"receive news!" began the jinnee, after beevor, with suspicion and
disapproval evident even on his back and shoulders, had retreated to
his own room, "suleyman, the son of daood, sleeps with his fathers."

"i know," retorted horace, whose nerves were unequal to much reference
to solomon just then. "so does queen anne."

"i have not heard of her. but art thou not astounded, then, by my
tidings?"

"i have matters nearer home to think about," said horace, dryly. "i must
say, mr. fakrash, you have landed me in a pretty mess!"

"explain thyself more fully, for i comprehend thee not."

"why on earth," horace groaned, "couldn't you let me build that house my
own way?"

"did i not hear thee with my own ears lament thy inability to perform
the task? thereupon, i determined that no disgrace should fall upon thee
by reason of such incompetence, since i myself would erect a palace so
splendid that it should cause thy name to live for ever. and, behold, it
is done."

"it is," said horace. "and so am i. i don't want to reproach you. i
quite feel that you have acted with the best intentions; but, oh, hang
it all! _can't_ you see that you've absolutely wrecked my career as an
architect?"

"that is a thing that cannot be," returned the jinnee, "seeing that thou
hast all the credit."

"the credit! this is england, not arabia. what credit can i gain from
being supposed to be the architect of an oriental pavilion, which might
be all very well for haroun-al-raschid, but i can assure you is
preposterous as a home for an average briton?"

"yet that overfed hound," remarked the jinnee, "expressed much
gratification therewith."

"naturally, after he had found that he could not give a candid opinion
except on all-fours. a valuable testimonial, that! and how do you
suppose i can take his money? no, mr. fakrash, if i have to go on
all-fours myself for it, i must say, and i will say, that you've made a
most frightful muddle of it!"

"acquaint me with thy wishes," said fakrash, a little abashed, "for thou
knowest that i can refuse thee naught."

"then," said horace, boldly, "couldn't you remove that palace--dissipate
it into space or something?"

"verily," said the jinnee, in an aggravated tone, "to do good acts unto
such as thee is but wasted time, for thou givest me no peace till they
are undone!"

"this is the last time," urged horace; "i promise never to ask you for
anything again."

"not for the first time hast thou made such a promise," said fakrash.
"and save for the magnitude of thy service unto me, i would not hearken
to this caprice of thine, nor wilt thou find me so indulgent on another
occasion. but for this once"--and he muttered some words and made a
sweeping gesture with his right hand--"thy desire is granted unto thee.
of the palace and all that is therein there remaineth no trace!"

"another surprise for poor old wackerbath," thought horace, "but a
pleasant one this time. my dear mr. fakrash," he said aloud, "i really
can't say how grateful i am to you. and now--i hate bothering you like
this, but if you _could_ manage to look in on professor futvoye"

"what!" cried the jinnee, "yet another request? already!"

"well, you promised you'd do that before, you know!" said horace.

"for that matter," remarked fakrash, "i have already fulfilled my
promise."

"you have?" horace exclaimed. "and does he believe now that it's all
true about that bottle?"

"when i left him," answered the jinnee, "all his doubts were removed."

"by jove, you _are_ a trump!" cried horace, only too glad to be able to
commend with sincerity. "and do you think, if i went to him now, i
should find him the same as usual?"

"nay," said fakrash, with his weak and yet inscrutable smile, "that is
more than i can promise thee."

"but why?" asked horace, "if he knows all?"

there was the oddest expression in the jinnee's furtive eyes: a kind of
elfin mischief combined with a sense of wrong-doing, like a naughty
child whose palate is still reminiscent of illicit jam. "because," he
replied, with a sound between a giggle and a chuckle, "because, in order
to overcome his unbelief, it was necessary to transform him into a
one-eyed mule of hideous appearance."

"_what!_" cried horace. but, whether to avoid thanks or explanations,
the jinnee had disappeared with his customary abruptness.

"fakrash!" shouted horace, "mr. fakrash! come back! do you hear? i
_must_ speak to you!" there was no answer; the jinnee might be well on
his way to lake chad, or jericho, by that time--he was certainly far
enough from great cloister street.

horace sat down at his drawing-table, and, his head buried in his hands,
tried to think out this latest complication. fakrash had transformed
professor futvoye into a one-eyed mule. it would have seemed incredible,
almost unthinkable, once, but so many impossibilities had happened to
horace of late that one more made little or no strain upon his
credulity.

what he felt chiefly was the new barrier that this event must raise
between himself and sylvia; to do him justice, the mere fact that the
father of his _fiancée_ was a mule did not lessen his ardour in the
slightest. even if he had felt no personal responsibility for the
calamity, he loved sylvia far too well to be deterred by it, and few
family cupboards are without a skeleton of some sort.

with courage and the determination to look only on the bright side of
things, almost any domestic drawback can be lived down.

but the real point, as he instantly recognised, was whether in the
changed condition of circumstances sylvia would consent to marry _him_.
might she not, after the experiences of that abominable dinner of his
the night before, connect him in some way with her poor father's
transformation? she might even suspect him of employing this means of
compelling the professor to renew their engagement; and, indeed, horace
was by no means certain himself that the jinnee might not have acted
from some muddle-headed motive of this kind. it was likely enough that
the professor, after learning the truth, should have refused to allow
his daughter to marry the _protégé_ of so dubious a patron, and that
fakrash had then resorted to pressure.

in any case, ventimore knew sylvia well enough to feel sure that pride
would steel her heart against him so long as this obstacle remained.

it would be unseemly to set down here all that horace said and thought
of the person who had brought all this upon them, but after some wild
and futile raving he became calm enough to recognise that his proper
place was by sylvia's side. perhaps he ought to have told her at first,
and then she would have been less unprepared for this--and yet how could
he trouble her mind so long as he could cling to the hope that the
jinnee would cease to interfere?

but now he could be silent no longer; naturally the prospect of calling
at cottesmore gardens just then was anything but agreeable, but he felt
it would be cowardly to keep away.

besides, he could cheer them up; he could bring with him a message of
hope. no doubt they believed that the professor's transformation would
be permanent--a harrowing prospect for so united a family; but,
fortunately, horace would be able to reassure them on this point.

fakrash had always revoked his previous performances as soon as he could
be brought to understand their fatuity--and ventimore would take good
care that he revoked this.

nevertheless, it was with a sinking heart and an unsteady hand that he
pulled the visitors' bell at the futvoyes' house that afternoon, for he
neither knew in what state he should find that afflicted family, nor how
they would regard his intrusion at such a time.

chapter xii

the messenger of hope

jessie, the neat and pretty parlour-maid, opened the door with a smile
of welcome which horace found reassuring. no girl, he thought, whose
master had suddenly been transformed into a mule could possibly smile
like that. the professor, she told him, was not at home, which again was
comforting. for a _savant_, however careless about his personal
appearance, would scarcely venture to brave public opinion in the
semblance of a quadruped.

"is the professor out?" he inquired, to make sure.

"not exactly out, sir," said the maid, "but particularly engaged,
working hard in his study, and not to be disturbed on no account."

this was encouraging, too, since a mule could hardly engage in literary
labour of any kind. evidently the jinnee must either have overrated his
supernatural powers, or else have been deliberately amusing himself at
horace's expense.

"then i will see miss futvoye," he said.

"miss sylvia is with the master, sir," said the girl; "but if you'll
come into the drawing-room i'll let mrs. futvoye know you are here."

he had not been in the drawing-room long before mrs. futvoye appeared,
and one glance at her face confirmed ventimore's worst fears. outwardly
she was calm enough, but it was only too obvious that her calmness was
the result of severe self-repression; her eyes, usually so shrewdly and
placidly observant, had a haggard and hunted look; her ears seemed on
the strain to catch some distant sound.

"i hardly thought we should see you to-day," she began, in a tone of
studied reserve; "but perhaps you came to offer some explanation of the
extraordinary manner in which you thought fit to entertain us last
night? if so"

"the fact is," said horace, looking into his hat, "i came because i was
rather anxious about the professor.

"about my husband?" said the poor lady, with a really heroic effort to
appear surprised. "he is--as well as could be expected. why should you
suppose otherwise?" she asked, with a flash of suspicion.

"i fancied perhaps that--that he mightn't be quite himself to-day," said
horace, with his eyes on the carpet.

"i see," said mrs. futvoye, regaining her composure; "you were afraid
that all those foreign dishes might not have agreed with him.
but--except that he is a little irritable this afternoon--he is much as
usual."

"i'm delighted to hear it," said horace, with reviving hope. "do you
think he would see me for a moment?"

"great heavens, no!" cried mrs. futvoye, with an irrepressible start; "i
mean," she explained, "that, after what took place last night,
anthony--my husband--very properly feels that an interview would be too
painful."

"but when we parted he was perfectly friendly."

"i can only say," replied the courageous woman, "that you would find him
considerably altered now."

horace had no difficulty in believing it.

"at least, i may see sylvia?" he pleaded.

"no," said mrs. futvoye; "i really can't have sylvia disturbed just now.
she is very busy, helping her father. anthony has to read a paper at one
of his societies to-morrow night, and she is writing it out from his
dictation."

if any departure from strict truth can ever be excusable, this surely
was one; unfortunately, just then sylvia herself burst into the room.

"mother," she cried, without seeing horace in her agitation, "do come
to papa, quick! he has just begun kicking again, and i can't manage him
alone.... oh, _you_ here?" she broke off, as she saw who was in the
room. "why do you come here now, horace? please, _please_ go away! papa
is rather unwell--nothing serious, only--oh, _do_ go away!"

"darling!" said horace, going to her and taking both her hands, "i know
all--do you understand?--_all_!"

"mamma!" cried sylvia, reproachfully, "have you told him--already? when
we settled that even horace wasn't to know till--till papa recovers!"

"i have told him nothing, my dear," replied her mother. "he can't
possibly know, unless--but no, that isn't possible. and, after all," she
added, with a warning glance at her daughter, "i don't know why we
should make any mystery about a mere attack of gout. but i had better go
and see if your father wants anything." and she hurried out of the room.

sylvia sat down and gazed silently into the fire. "i dare say you don't
know how dreadfully people kick when they've got gout," she remarked
presently.

"oh yes, i do," said horace, sympathetically; "at least, i can guess."

"especially when it's in both legs," continued sylvia.

"or," said horace gently, "in all four."

"ah, you _do_ know!" cried sylvia. "then it's all the more horrid of you
to come!"

"dearest," said horace, "is not this just the time when my place should
be near you--and him?"

"not near papa, horace!" she put in anxiously; "it wouldn't be at all
safe."

"do you really think i have any fear for myself?"

"are you sure you quite know--what he is like now?"

"i understand," said horace, trying to put it as considerately as
possible, "that a casual observer, who didn't know your father, might
mistake him, at first sight, for--for some sort of quadruped."

"he's a mule," sobbed sylvia, breaking down entirely. "i could bear it
better if he had been a _nice_ mule.... b--but he isn't!"

"whatever he may be," declared horace, as he knelt by her chair
endeavouring to comfort her, "nothing can alter my profound respect for
him. and you must let me see him, sylvia; because i fully believe i
shall be able to cheer him up."

"if you imagine you can persuade him to--to laugh it off!" said sylvia,
tearfully.

"i wasn't proposing to try to make him see the humorous side of his
situation," horace mildly explained. "i trust i have more tact than
that. but he may be glad to know that, at the worst, it is only a
temporary inconvenience. i'll take care that he's all right again before
very long."

she started up and looked at him, her eyes widened with dawning dread
and mistrust.

"if you can speak like that," she said, "it must have been _you_
who--no, i can't believe it--that would be too horrible!"

"i who did _what_, sylvia? weren't you there when--when it happened?"

"no," she replied. "i was only told of it afterwards. mother heard papa
talking loudly in his study this morning, as if he was angry with
somebody, and at last she grew so uneasy she couldn't bear it any
longer, and went in to see what was the matter with him. dad was quite
alone and looked as usual, only a little excited; and then, without the
slightest warning, just as she entered the room, he--he changed slowly
into a mule before her eyes! anybody but mamma would have lost her head
and roused the whole house."

"thank heaven she didn't!" said horace, fervently. "that was what i was
most afraid of."

"then--oh, horace, it _was_ you! it's no use denying it. i feel more
certain of it every moment!"

"now, sylvia!" he protested, still anxious, if possible, to keep the
worst from her, "what could have put such an idea as that into your
head?"

"i don't know," she said slowly. "several things last night. no one who
was really nice, and like everybody else, would live in such queer rooms
like those, and dine on cushions, with dreadful black slaves, and--and
dancing-girls and things. you pretended you were quite poor."

"so i am, darling. and as for my rooms, and--and the rest, they're all
gone, sylvia. if you went to vincent square to-day, you wouldn't find a
trace of them!"

"that only shows!" said sylvia. "but why should you play such a cruel,
and--and ungentlemanly trick on poor dad? if you had ever really loved
me!"

"but i do, sylvia, you can't really believe me capable of such an
outrage! look at me and tell me so."

"no, horace," said sylvia frankly. "i don't believe _you_ did it. but i
believe you know who _did_. and you had better tell me at once!"

"if you're quite sure you can stand it," he replied, "i'll tell you
everything." and, as briefly as possible, he told her how he had
unsealed the brass bottle, and all that had come of it.

she bore it, on the whole, better than he had expected; perhaps, being a
woman, it was some consolation to her to remind him that she had
foretold something of this kind from the very first.

"but, of course, i never really thought it would be so awful as this!"
she said. "horace, how _could_ you be so careless as to let a great
wicked thing like that escape out of its bottle?"

"i had a notion it was a manuscript," said horace--"till he came out.
but he isn't a great wicked thing, sylvia. he's an amiable old jinnee
enough. and he'd do anything for me. nobody could be more grateful and
generous than he has been."

"do you call it generous to change the poor, dear dad into a mule?"
inquired sylvia, with a little curl of her upper lip.

"that was an oversight," said horace; "he meant no harm by it. in arabia
they do these things--or used to in his day. not that that's much excuse
for him. still, he's not so young as he was, and besides, being bottled
up for all those centuries must have narrowed him rather. you must try
and make allowances for him, darling."

"i shan't," said sylvia, "unless he apologises to poor father, and puts
him right at once."

"why, of course, he'll do that," horace answered confidently. "i'll see
that he does. i don't mean to stand any more of his nonsense. i'm afraid
i've been just a little too slack for fear of hurting his feelings; but
this time he's gone too far, and i shall talk to him like a dutch uncle.
he's always ready to do the right thing when he's once shown where he
has gone wrong--only he takes such a lot of showing, poor old chap!"

"but when do you think he'll--do the right thing?"

"oh, as soon as i see him again."

"yes; but when _will_ you see him again?"

"that's more than i can say. he's away just now--in china, or peru, or
somewhere."

"horace! then he won't be back for months and months!"

"oh yes, he will. he can do the whole trip, _aller et retour_, you know,
in a few hours. he's an active old beggar for his age. in the meantime,
dearest, the chief thing is to keep up your father's spirits. so i think
i'd better i was just telling sylvia, mrs. futvoye," he said, as
that lady re-entered the room, "that i should like to see the professor
at once."

"it's quite, _quite_ impossible!" was the nervous reply. "he's in such a
state that he's unable to see any one. you don't know how fractious gout
makes him!"

"dear mrs. futvoye," said horace, "believe me, i know more than you
suppose."

"yes, mother, dear," put in sylvia, "he knows everything--_really_
everything. and perhaps it might do dad good to see him."

mrs. futvoye sank helplessly down on a settee. "oh, dear me!" she said.
"i don't know _what_ to say. i really don't. if you had seen him plunge
at the mere suggestion of a doctor!"

privately, though naturally he could not say so, horace thought a vet.
might be more appropriate, but eventually he persuaded mrs. futvoye to
conduct him to her husband's study.

"anthony, love," she said, as she knocked gently at the door, "i've
brought horace ventimore to see you for a few moments, if he may."

it seemed from the sounds of furious snorting and stamping within, that
the professor resented this intrusion on his privacy. "my dear anthony,"
said his devoted wife, as she unlocked the door and turned the key on
the inside after admitting horace, "try to be calm. think of the
servants downstairs. horace is _so_ anxious to help."

as for ventimore, he was speechless--so inexpressibly shocked was he by
the alteration in the professor's appearance. he had never seen a mule
in sorrier condition or in so vicious a temper. most of the lighter
furniture had been already reduced to matchwood; the glass doors of the
bookcase were starred or shivered; precious egyptian pottery and glass
were strewn in fragments on the carpets, and even the mummy, though it
still smiled with the same enigmatic cheerfulness, seemed to have
suffered severely from the professorial hoofs.

horace instinctively felt that any words of conventional sympathy would
jar here; indeed, the professor's attitude and expression reminded him
irresistibly of a certain "blondin donkey" he had seen enacted by
music-hall artists, at the point where it becomes sullen and defiant.
only, he had laughed helplessly at the blondin donkey, and somehow he
felt no inclination to laugh now.

"believe me, sir," he began, "i would not disturb you like this
unless--steady there, for heaven's sake professor, don't kick till
you've heard me out!" for, the mule, in a clumsy, shambling way which
betrayed the novice, was slowly revolving on his own axis so as to bring
his hind-quarters into action, while still keeping his only serviceable
eye upon his unwelcome visitor.

"listen to me, sir," said horace, manoeuvring in his turn. "i'm not to
blame for this, and if you brain me, as you seem to be endeavouring to
do, you'll simply destroy the only living man who can get you out of
this."

the mule appeared impressed by this, and backed cumbrously into a
corner, from which he regarded horace with a mistrustful, but attentive,
eye. "if, as i imagine, sir," continued horace, "you are, though
temporarily deprived of speech, perfectly capable of following an
argument, will you kindly signify it by raising your right ear?" the
mule's right ear rose with a sharp twitch.

"now we can get on," said horace. "first let me tell you that i
repudiate all responsibility for the proceedings of that infernal
jinnee.... i wouldn't stamp like that--you might go through the floor,
you know.... now, if you will only exercise a little patience"

at this the exasperated animal made a sudden run at him with his mouth
open, which obliged horace to shelter himself behind a large leather
arm-chair. "you really _must_ keep cool, sir," he remonstrated; "your
nerves are naturally upset. if i might suggest a little champagne--you
could manage it in--in a bucket, and it would help you to pull yourself
together. a whisk of your--er--tail would imply consent." the
professor's tail instantly swept some rare arabian glass lamps and vases
from a shelf at his rear, whereupon mrs. futvoye went out, and returned
presently with a bottle of champagne and a large china _jardinière_, as
the best substitute she could find for a bucket.

when the mule had drained the flower-pot greedily and appeared
refreshed, horace proceeded: "i have every hope, sir," he said, "that
before many hours you will be smiling--pray don't prance like that, i
mean what i say--smiling over what now seems to you, very justly, a most
annoying and serious catastrophe. i shall speak seriously to fakrash
(the jinnee, you know), and i am sure that, as soon as he realises what
a frightful blunder he has made, he will be the first to offer you every
reparation in his power. for, old foozle as he is, he's thoroughly
good-hearted."

the professor drooped his ears at this, and shook his head with a
doleful incredulity that made him look more like the pantomime donkey
than ever.

"i think i understand him fairly well by this time, sir," said horace,
"and i'll answer for it that there's no real harm in him. i give you my
word of honour that, if you'll only remain quiet and leave everything to
me, you shall very soon be released from this absurd position. that's
all i came to tell you, and now i won't trouble you any longer. if you
_could_ bring yourself, as a sign that you bear me no ill-feeling, to
give me your--your off-foreleg at parting, i"

but the professor turned his back in so pointed and ominous a manner
that horace judged it better to withdraw without insisting further. "i'm
afraid," he said to mrs. futvoye, after they had rejoined sylvia in the
drawing-room--"i'm afraid your husband is still a little sore with me
about this miserable business."

"i don't know what else you can expect," replied the lady, rather
tartly; "he can't help feeling--as we all must and do, after what you
said just now--that, but for you, this would never have happened!"

"if you mean it was all through my attending that sale," said horace,
"you might remember that i only went there at the professor's request.
you know that, sylvia."

"yes, horace," said sylvia; "but papa never asked you to buy a hideous
brass bottle with a nasty genius in it. and any one with ordinary common
sense would have kept it properly corked!"

"what, you against me too, sylvia!" cried horace, cut to the quick.

"no, horace, never against you. i didn't mean to say what i did. only it
_is_ such a relief to put the blame on somebody. i know, i _know_ you
feel it almost as much as we do. but so long as poor, dear papa remains
as he is, we can never be anything to one another. you must see that,
horace!"

"yes, i see that," he said; "but trust me, sylvia, he shall _not_ remain
as he is. i swear he shall not. in another day or two, at the outside,
you will see him his own self once more. and then--oh, darling, darling,
you won't let anything or anybody separate us? promise me that!"

he would have held her in his arms, but she kept him at a distance.
"when papa is himself again," she said, "i shall know better what to
say. i can't promise anything now, horace."

horace recognised that no appeal would draw a more definite answer from
her just then; so he took his leave, with the feeling that, after all,
matters must improve before very long, and in the meantime he must bear
the suspense with patience.

he got through dinner as well as he could in his own rooms, for he did
not like to go to his club lest the jinnee should suddenly return during
his absence.

"if he wants me he'd be quite equal to coming on to the club after me,"
he reflected, "for he has about as much sense of the fitness of things
as mary's lamb. i shouldn't care about seeing him suddenly bursting
through the floor of the smoking-room. nor would the committee."

he sat up late, in the hope that fakrash would appear; but the jinnee
made no sign, and horace began to get uneasy. "i wish there was some
way of ringing him up," he thought. "if he were only the slave of a ring
or a lamp, i'd rub it; but it wouldn't be any use to rub that
bottle--and, besides, he isn't a slave. probably he has a suspicion that
he has not exactly distinguished himself over his latest feat, and
thinks it prudent to keep out of my way for the present. but if he
fancies he'll make things any better for himself by that he'll find
himself mistaken."

it was maddening to think of the unhappy professor still fretting away
hour after hour in the uncongenial form of a mule, waiting impatiently
for the relief that never came. if it lingered much longer, he might
actually starve, unless his family thought of getting in some oats for
him, and he could be prevailed upon to touch them. and how much longer
could they succeed in concealing the nature of his affliction? how long
before all kensington, and the whole civilised world, would know that
one of the leading orientalists in europe was restlessly prancing on
four legs around his study in cottesmore gardens?

racked by speculations such as these, ventimore lay awake till well into
the small hours, when he dropped off into troubled dreams that, wild as
they were, could not be more grotesquely fantastic than the realities to
which they were the alternative.

chapter xiii

a choice of evils

not even his morning tub could brace ventimore's spirits to their usual
cheerfulness. after sending away his breakfast almost untasted he stood
at his window, looking drearily out over the crude green turf of vincent
square at the indigo masses of the abbey and the victoria tower and the
huge gasometers to the right which loomed faintly through a dun-coloured
haze.

he felt a positive loathing for his office, to which he had gone with
such high hopes and enthusiasm of late. there was no work for him to do
there any longer, and the sight of his drawing-table and materials
would, he knew, be intolerable in their mute mockery.

nor could he with any decency present himself again at cottesmore
gardens while the situation still remained unchanged, as it must do
until he had seen fakrash.

when would the jinnee return, or--horrible suspicion!--did he never
intend to return at all?

"fakrash!" he groaned aloud, "you _can't_ really mean to leave me in
such a regular deuce of a hole as this?"

"at thy service!" said a well-known voice behind him, and he turned to
see the jinnee standing smiling on the hearthrug--and at this
accomplishment of his dearest desire all his indignation surged back.

"oh, _there_ you are!" he said irritably. "where on earth have you been
all this time?"

"nowhere on earth," was the bland reply; "but in the regions of the air,
seeking to promote thy welfare."

"if you have been as brilliantly successful up there as you have down
here," retorted horace, "i have much to thank you for."

"i am more than repaid," answered the jinnee, who, like many highly
estimable persons, was almost impervious to irony, "by such assurances
of thy gratitude."

"i'm _not_ grateful," said horace, fuming. "i'm devilish annoyed!"

"well hath it been written," replied the jinnee:--

"'be disregardful of thine affairs, and commit them to the course
of fate,
for often a thing that enrages thee may eventually be to thee
pleasing.'"

"i don't see the remotest chance of that, in my case," said horace.

"why is thy countenance thus troubled, and what new complaint hast thou
against me?"

"what the devil do you mean by turning a distinguished and perfectly
inoffensive scholar into a wall-eyed mule?" horace broke out. "if that
is your idea of a practical joke!"

"it is one of the easiest affairs possible," said the jinnee,
complacently running his fingers through the thin strands of his beard.
"i have accomplished such transformations on several occasions."

"then you ought to be ashamed of yourself, that's all. the question is
now--how do you propose to restore him again?"

"far from undoing be that which is accomplished!" was the sententious
answer.

"what?" cried horace, hardly believing his ears; "you surely don't mean
to allow that unhappy professor to remain like that for ever, do you?"

"none can alter what is predestined."

"very likely not. but it wasn't decreed that a learned man should be
suddenly degraded to a beastly mule for the rest of his life. destiny
wouldn't be such a fool!"

"despise not mules, for they are useful and valuable animals in the
household."

"but, confound it all, have you no imagination? can't you enter
at all into the feelings of a man--a man of wide learning and
reputation--suddenly plunged into such a humiliating condition?"

"upon his own head be it," said fakrash, coldly. "for he hath brought
this fate upon himself."

"well, how do you suppose that you have helped _me_ by this performance?
will it make him any the more disposed to consent to my marrying his
daughter? is that all you know of the world?"

"it is not my intention that thou shouldst take his daughter to wife."

"whether you approve or not, it's my intention to marry her."

"assuredly she will not marry thee so long as her father remaineth a
mule."

"there i agree with you. but is that your notion of doing me a good
turn?"

"i did not consider thy interest in this matter."

"then will you be good enough to consider it now? i have pledged my word
that he shall be restored to his original form. not only my happiness is
at stake, but my honour."

"by failure to perform the impossible none can lose honour. and this is
a thing that cannot be undone."

"cannot be undone?" repeated horace, feeling a cold clutch at his heart.
"why?"

"because," said the jinnee, sullenly, "i have forgotten the way."

"nonsense!" retorted horace; "i don't believe it. why," he urged,
descending to flattery, "you're such a clever old johnny--i beg your
pardon, i meant such a clever old _jinnee_--you can do anything, if you
only give your mind to it. just look at the way you changed this house
back again to what it was. marvellous!"

"that was the veriest trifle," said fakrash, though he was obviously
pleased by this tribute to his talent; "this would be a different affair
altogether."

"but child's play to _you_!" insinuated horace. "come, you know very
well you can do it if you only choose."

"it may be as thou sayest. but i do not choose."

"then i think," said horace, "that, considering the obligation you admit
yourself you are under to me, i have a right to know the reason--the
_real_ reason--why you refuse."

"thy claim is not without justice," answered the jinnee, after a pause,
"nor can i decline to gratify thee."

"that's right," cried horace; "i knew you'd see it in the proper light
when it was once put to you. now, don't lose any more time, but restore
that unfortunate man at once, as you've promised."

"not so," said the jinnee; "i promised thee a reason for my refusal--and
that thou shalt have. know then, o my son, that this indiscreet one had,
by some vile and unhallowed arts, divined the hidden meaning of what was
written upon the seal of the bottle wherein i was confined, and was
preparing to reveal the same unto all men."

"what would it matter to you if he did?"

"much--for the writing contained a false and lying record of my
actions."

"if it is all lies, it can't do you any harm. why not treat them with
the contempt they deserve?"

"they are not _all_ lies," the jinnee admitted reluctantly.

"well, never mind. whatever you've done, you've expiated it by this
time."

"now that suleyman is no more, it is my desire to seek out my kinsmen of
the green jinn, and live out my days in amity and honour. how can that
be if they hear my name execrated by all mortals?"

"nobody would think of execrating you about an affair three thousand
years old. it's too stale a scandal."

"thou speakest without understanding. i tell thee that if men knew but
the half of my misdoings," said fakrash, in a tone not altogether free
from a kind of sombre complacency, "the noise of them would rise even
unto the uppermost regions, and scorn and loathing would be my portion."

"oh, it's not so bad as all that," said horace, who had a private
impression that the jinnee's "past" would probably turn out to be
chiefly made up of peccadilloes. "but, anyway, i'm sure the professor
will readily agree to keep silence about it; and, as you have of course,
got the seal in your own possession again"

"nay; the seal is still in his possession, and it is naught to me where
it is deposited," said fakrash, "since the only mortal who hath
deciphered it is now a dumb animal."

"not at all," said horace. "there are several friends of his who could
decipher that inscription quite as easily as he did."

"is this the truth?" said the jinnee, in visible alarm.

"certainly," said horace. "within the last quarter of a century
archæology has made great strides. our learned men can now read
babylonian bricks and chaldean tablets as easily as if they were
advertisements on galvanised iron. you may think you've been extremely
clever in turning the professor into an animal, but you'll probably find
you've only made another mistake."

"how so?" inquired fakrash.

"well," said horace, seeing his advantage, and pushing it
unscrupulously, "now, that, in your infinite wisdom, you have ordained
that he should be a mule, he naturally can't possess property. therefore
all his effects will have to be sold, and amongst them will be that seal
of yours, which, like many other things in his collection, will probably
be bought up by the british museum, where it will be examined and
commented upon by every orientalist in europe. i suppose you've thought
of all that?"

"o young man of marvellous sagacity!" said the jinnee; "truly i had
omitted to consider these things, and thou hast opened my eyes in time.
for i will present myself unto this man-mule and adjure him to reveal
where he hath bestowed this seal, so that i may regain it."

"he can't do that, you know, so long as he remains a mule."

"i will endow him with speech for the purpose."

"let me tell you this," said horace: "he's in a very nasty temper just
now, naturally enough, and you won't get anything out of him until you
have restored him to human form. if you do that, he'll agree to
anything."

"whether i restore him or not will depend not on me, but on the damsel
who is his daughter, and to whom thou art contracted in marriage. for
first of all i must speak with her."

"so long as i am present and you promise not to play any tricks," said
horace, "i've no objection, for i believe, if you once saw her and heard
her plead for her poor father, you wouldn't have the heart to hold out
any longer. but you must give me your word that you'll behave yourself."

"thou hast it," said the jinnee; "i do but desire to see her on thine
account."

"very well," agreed horace; "but i really can't introduce you in that
turban--she'd be terrified. couldn't you contrive to get yourself up in
commonplace english clothes, just for once--something that wouldn't
attract so much attention?"

"will this satisfy thee?" inquired the jinnee, as his green turban and
flowing robes suddenly resolved themselves into the conventional
chimney-pot hat, frock-coat, and trousers of modern civilisation.

he bore a painful resemblance in them to the kind of elderly gentleman
who comes on in the harlequinade to be bonneted by the clown; but horace
was in no mood to be critical just then.

"that's better," he said encouragingly; "much better. now," he added, as
he led the way to the hall and put on his own hat and overcoat, "we'll
go out and find a hansom and be at kensington in less than twenty
minutes."

"we shall be there in less than twenty seconds," said the jinnee,
seizing him by the arm above the elbow; and horace found himself
suddenly carried up into the air and set down, gasping with surprise and
want of breath, on the pavement opposite the futvoyes' door.

"i should just like to observe," he said, as soon as he could speak,
"that if we've been seen, we shall probably cause a sensation. londoners
are not accustomed to seeing people skimming over the chimney-pots like
amateur rooks."

"trouble not for that," said fakrash, "for no mortal eyes are capable of
following our flight."

"i hope not," said horace, "or i shall lose any reputation i have left.
i think," he added, "i'd better go in alone first and prepare them, if
you don't mind waiting outside. i'll come to the window and wave my
pocket-handkerchief when they're ready. and _do_ come in by the door
like an ordinary person, and ask the maidservant if you may see me."

"i will bear it in mind," answered the jinnee, and suddenly sank, or
seemed to sink, through a chink in the pavement.

horace, after ringing at the futvoyes' door, was admitted and shown into
the drawing-room, where sylvia presently came to him, looking as lovely
as ever, in spite of the pallor due to sleeplessness and anxiety. "it is
kind of you to call and inquire," she said, with the unnatural calm of
suppressed hysteria. "dad is much the same this morning. he had a fairly
good night, and was able to take part of a carrot for breakfast--but
i'm afraid he has just remembered that he has to read a paper on
'oriental occultism' before the asiatic society this evening, and it's
worrying him a little.... oh, horace," she broke out, unexpectedly, "how
perfectly awful all this is! how _are_ we to bear it?"

"don't give way, darling!" said horace; "you will not have to bear it
much longer."

"it's all very well, horace, but unless something is done _soon_ it will
be too late. we can't go _on_ keeping a mule in the study without the
servants suspecting something, and where are we to put poor, dear papa?
it's too ghastly to think of his having to be sent away to--to a home of
rest for horses--and yet what _is_ to be done with him?... why do you
come if you can't do anything?"

"i shouldn't be here unless i could bring you good news. you remember
what i told you about the jinnee?"

"remember!" cried sylvia. "as if i could forget! has he really come
back, horace?"

"yes. i think i have brought him to see that he has made a foolish
mistake in enchanting your unfortunate father, and he seems willing to
undo it on certain conditions. he is somewhere within call at this
moment, and will come in whenever i give the signal. but he wishes to
speak to you first."

"to _me_? oh, no, horace!" exclaimed sylvia, recoiling. "i'd so much
rather not. i don't like things that have come out of brass bottles. i
shouldn't know what to say, and it would frighten me horribly."

"you must be brave, darling!" said horace. "remember that it depends on
you whether the professor is to be restored or not. and there's nothing
alarming about old fakrash, either, i've got him to put on ordinary
things, and he really doesn't look so bad in them. he's quite a mild,
amiable old noodle, and he'll do anything for you, if you'll only stroke
him down the right way. you _will_ see him, won't you, for your father's
sake?"

"if i must," said sylvia, with a shudder, "i--i'll be as nice to him as
i can."

horace went to the window and gave the signal, though there was no one
in sight. however, it was evidently seen, for the next moment there was
a resounding blow at the front door, and a little later jessie, the
parlour-maid, announced "mr. fatrasher larmash--to see mr. ventimore,"
and the jinnee stalked gravely in, with his tall hat on his head.

"you are probably not aware of it, sir," said horace, "but it is the
custom here to uncover in the presence of a lady." the jinnee removed
his hat with both hands, and stood silent and impassive.

"let me present you to miss sylvia futvoye," ventimore continued, "the
lady whose name you have already heard."

there was a momentary gleam in fakrash's odd, slanting eyes as they
lighted on sylvia's shrinking figure, but he made no acknowledgment of
the introduction.

"the damsel is not without comeliness," he remarked to horace; "but
there are lovelier far than she."

"i didn't ask you for either criticisms or comparisons," said ventimore,
sharply; "there is nobody in the world equal to miss futvoye, in my
opinion, and you will be good enough to remember that fact. she is
exceedingly distressed (as any dutiful daughter would be) by the cruel
and senseless trick you have played her father, and she begs that you
will rectify it at once. don't you, sylvia?"

"yes, indeed!" said sylvia, almost in a whisper, "if--if it isn't
troubling you too much!"

"i have been turning over thy words in my mind," said fakrash to horace,
still ignoring sylvia, "and i am convinced that thou art right. even if
the contents of the seal were known of all men, they would raise no
clamour about affairs that concern them not. therefore it is nothing to
me in whose hands the seal may be. dost thou not agree with me in this?"

"of course i do," said horace. "and it naturally follows that"

"it naturally follows, as thou sayest," said the jinnee, with a cunning
assumption of indifference, "that i have naught to gain by demanding
back the seal as the price of restoring this damsel's father to his
original form. wherefore, so far as i am concerned, let him remain a
mule for ever; unless, indeed, thou art ready to comply with my
conditions."

"conditions!" cried horace, utterly unprepared for this conclusion.
"what can you possibly want from me? but state them. i'll agree to
anything, in reason!"

"i demand that thou shouldst renounce the hand of this damsel."

"that's out of all reason," said horace, "and you know it. i will never
give her up, so long as she is willing to keep me."

"maiden," said the jinnee, addressing sylvia for the first time, "the
matter rests with thee. wilt thou release this my son from his contract,
since thou art no fit wife for such as he?"

"how can i," cried sylvia, "when i love him and he loves me? what a
wicked tyrannical old thing you must be to expect it! i _can't_ give him
up."

"it is but giving up what can never be thine," said fakrash. "and be not
anxious for him, for i will reward and console him a thousandfold for
the loss of thy society. a little while, and he shall remember thee no
more."

"don't believe him, darling," said horace; "you know me better than
that."

"remember," said the jinnee, "that by thy refusal thou wilt condemn thy
parent to remain a mule throughout all his days. art thou so unnatural
and hard-hearted a daughter as to do this thing?"

"oh, i couldn't!" cried sylvia. "i can't let poor father remain a mule
all his life when one word--and yet what _am_ i to do? horace, what
shall i say? advise me.... advise me!"

"heaven help us both!" groaned ventimore. "if i could only see the
right thing to do. look here, mr. fakrash," he added, "this is a matter
that requires consideration. will you relieve us of your presence for a
short time, while we talk it over?"

"with all my heart," said the jinnee, in the most obliging manner in the
world, and vanished instantly.

"now, darling," began horace, after he had gone, "if that unspeakable
old scoundrel is really in earnest, there's no denying that he's got us
in an extremely tight place. but i can't bring myself to believe that he
_does_ mean it. i fancy he's only trying us. and what i want you to do
is not to consider me in the matter at all."

"how can i help it?" said poor sylvia. "horace, you--you don't _want_ to
be released, do you?"

"i?" said horace, "when you are all i have in the world! that's so
likely, sylvia! but we are bound to look facts in the face. to begin
with, even if this hadn't happened, your people wouldn't let our
engagement continue. for my prospects have changed again, dearest. i'm
even worse off than when we first met, for that confounded jinnee has
contrived to lose my first and only client for me--the one thing worth
having he ever gave me." and he told her the story of the mushroom
palace and mr. wackerbath's withdrawal. "so you see, darling," he
concluded, "i haven't even a home to offer you; and if i had, it would
be miserably uncomfortable for you with that old marplot continually
dropping in on us--especially if, as i'm afraid he has, he's taken some
unreasonable dislike to you."

"but surely you can talk him over?" said sylvia; "you said you could do
anything you liked with him."

"i'm beginning to find," he replied, ruefully enough, "that he's not so
easily managed as i thought. and for the present, i'm afraid, if we are
to get the professor out of this, that there's nothing for it but to
humour old fakrash."

"then you actually advise me to--to break it off?" she cried; "i never
thought you would do that!"

"for your own sake," said horace; "for your father's sake. if _you_
won't, sylvia, i _must_. and you will spare me that? let us both agree
to part and--and trust that we shall be united some day."

"don't try to deceive me or yourself, horace," she said; "if we part
now, it will be for ever."

he had a dismal conviction that she was right. "we must hope for the
best," he said drearily; "fakrash may have some motive in all this we
don't understand. or he may relent. but part we must, for the present."

"very well," she said. "if he restores dad, i will give you up. but not
unless."

"hath the damsel decided?" asked the jinnee, suddenly re-appearing; "for
the period of deliberation is past."

"miss futvoye and i," horace answered for her, "are willing to consider
our engagement at an end, until you approve of its renewal, on condition
that you restore her father at once."

"agreed!" said fakrash. "conduct me to him, and we will arrange the
matter without delay."

outside they met mrs. futvoye on her way from the study. "you here,
horace?" she exclaimed. "and who is this--gentleman?"

"this," said horace, "is the--er--author of the professor's misfortunes,
and he had come here at my request to undo his work."

"it _would_ be so kind of him!" exclaimed the distressed lady, who was
by this time far beyond either surprise or resentment. "i'm sure, if he
knew all we have gone through!" and she led the way to her husband's
room.

as soon as the door was opened the professor seemed to recognise his
tormentor in spite of his changed raiment, and was so powerfully
agitated that he actually reeled on his four legs, and "stood over" in
a lamentable fashion.

"o man of distinguished attainments!" began the jinnee, "whom i have
caused, for reasons that are known unto thee, to assume the shape of a
mule, speak, i adjure thee, and tell me where thou hast deposited the
inscribed seal which is in thy possession."

the professor spoke; and the effect of articulate speech proceeding from
the mouth of what was to all outward seeming an ordinary mule was
strange beyond description. "i'll see you damned first," he said
sullenly. "you can't do worse to me than you've done already!"

"as thou wilt," said fakrash; "but unless i regain it, i will not
restore thee to what thou wast."

"well, then," said the mule, savagely, "you'll find it in the top
right-hand drawer of my writing-table: the key is in that diorite bowl
on the mantelpiece."

the jinnee unlocked the drawer, and took out the metal cap, which he
placed in the breast pocket of his incongruous frock-coat. "so far,
well," he said; "next thou must deliver up to me the transcription thou
hast made, and swear to preserve an inviolable secrecy regarding the
meaning thereof."

"do you know what you're asking, sir?" said the mule, laying back his
ears viciously. "do you think that to oblige you i'm going to suppress
one of the most remarkable discoveries of my whole scientific career?
never, sir--never!"

"since if thou refusest i shall assuredly deprive thee of speech once
more and leave thee a mule, as thou art now, of hideous appearance,"
said the jinnee, "thou art like to gain little by a discovery which thou
wilt be unable to impart. however, the choice rests with thee."

the mule rolled his one eye, and showed all his teeth in a vicious
snarl. "you've got the whip-hand of me," he said, "and i may as well
give in. there's a transcript inside my blotting-case--it's the only
copy i've made."

fakrash found the paper, which he rubbed into invisibility between his
palms, as any ordinary conjurer might do.

"now raise thy right forefoot," he said, "and swear by all thou holdest
sacred never to divulge what thou hast learnt"--which oath the
professor, in the vilest of tempers, took, clumsily enough.

"good," said the jinnee, with a grim smile. "now let one of thy women
bring me a cup of fair water."

sylvia went out, and came back with a cup of water. "it's filtered," she
said anxiously; "i don't know if that will do?"

"it will suffice," said fakrash. "let both the women withdraw."

"surely," remonstrated mrs. futvoye, "you don't mean to turn his wife
and daughter out of the room at such a moment as this? we shall be
perfectly quiet, and we may even be of some help."

"do as you're told, my dear!" snapped the ungrateful mule; "do as you're
told. you'll only be in the way here. do you suppose he doesn't know his
own beastly business?"

they left accordingly; whereupon fakrash took the cup--an ordinary
breakfast cup with a greek key-border pattern in pale blue round the
top--and, drenching the mule with the contents, exclaimed, "quit this
form and return to the form in which thou wast!"

for a dreadful moment or two it seemed as if no effect was to be
produced; the animal simply stood and shivered, and ventimore began to
feel an agonising suspicion that the jinnee really had, as he had first
asserted, forgotten how to perform this particular incantation.

all at once the mule reared, and began to beat the air frantically with
his fore-hoofs; after which he fell heavily backward into the nearest
armchair (which was, fortunately, a solid and capacious piece of
furniture) with his fore-legs hanging limply at his side, in a
semi-human fashion. there was a brief convulsion, and then, by some
gradual process unspeakably impressive to witness, the man seemed to
break through the mule, the mule became merged in the man--and professor
futvoye, restored to his own natural form and habit, sat gasping and
trembling in the chair before them.

chapter xiv

"since there's no help, come, let us kiss and part!"

as soon as the professor seemed to have regained his faculties, horace
opened the door and called in sylvia and her mother, who were, as was
only to be expected, overcome with joy on seeing the head of the family
released from his ignoble condition of a singularly ill-favoured
quadruped.

"there, there," said the professor, as he submitted to their embraces
and incoherent congratulations, "it's nothing to make a fuss about. i'm
quite myself again, as you can see. and," he added, with an unreasonable
outburst of ill-temper, "if one of you had only had the common sense to
think of such a simple remedy as sprinkling a little cold water over me
when i was first taken like that, i should have been spared a great deal
of unnecessary inconvenience. but that's always the way with women--lose
their heads the moment anything goes wrong! if i had not kept perfectly
cool myself--"

"it was very, very stupid of us not to think of it, papa," said sylvia,
tactfully ignoring the fact that there was scarcely an undamaged article
in the room; "still, you know, if _we_ had thrown the water it mightn't
have had the same effect."

"i'm not in a condition to argue now," said her father; "you didn't
trouble to try it, and there's no more to be said."

"no more to be said!" exclaimed fakrash. "o thou monster of ingratitude,
hast thou no thanks for him who hath delivered thee from thy
predicament?"

"as i am already indebted to you, sir," said the professor, "for about
twenty-four hours of the most poignant and humiliating mental and bodily
anguish a human being can endure, inflicted for no valid reason that i
can discover, except the wanton indulgence of your unholy powers, i can
only say that any gratitude of which i am conscious is of a very
qualified description. as for you, ventimore," he added, turning to
horace, "i don't know--i can only guess at--the part you have played in
this wretched business; but in any case you will understand, once for
all, that all relations between us must cease."

"papa," said sylvia, tremulously, "horace and i have already agreed
that--that we must separate."

"at my bidding," explained fakrash, suavely; "for such an alliance would
be totally unworthy of his merits and condition."

this frankness was rather too much for the professor, whose temper had
not been improved by his recent trials.

"nobody asked for your opinion, sir!" he snapped. "a person who has only
recently been released from a term of long and, from all i have been
able to ascertain, well-deserved imprisonment, is scarcely entitled to
pose as an authority on social rank. have the decency not to interfere
again with my domestic affairs."

"excellent is the saying," remarked the imperturbable jinnee, "'let the
rat that is between the paws of the leopard observe rigidly all the
rules of politeness and refrain from words of provocation.' for to
return thee to the form of a mule once more would be no difficult
undertaking."

"i think i failed to make myself clear," the professor hastened to
observe--"failed to make myself clear. i--i merely meant to congratulate
you on your fortunate escape from the consequences of what i--i don't
doubt was an error of justice. i--i am sure that, in the future, you
will employ your--your very remarkable abilities to better purpose, and
i would suggest that the greatest service you can do this unfortunate
young man here is to abstain from any further attempts to promote his
interests."

"hear, hear!" horace could not help throwing in, though in so discreet
an undertone that it was inaudible.

"far be this from me," replied fakrash. "for he has become unto me even
as a favourite son, whom i design to place upon the golden pinnacle of
felicity. therefore, i have chosen for him a wife, who is unto this
damsel of thine as the full moon to the glow-worm, and as the bird of
paradise to an unfledged sparrow. and the nuptials shall be celebrated
before many hours."

"horace!" cried sylvia, justly incensed, "why--_why_ didn't you tell me
this before?"

"because," said the unhappy horace, "this is the very first i've heard
of it. he's always springing some fresh surprise on me," he added, in a
whisper--"but they never come to anything much. and he can't marry me
against my will, you know."

"no," said sylvia, biting her lip. "i never supposed he could do that,
horace."

"i'll settle this at once," he replied. "now, look here, mr. jinnee," he
added, "i don't know what new scheme you have got in your head--but if
you are proposing to marry me to anybody in particular"

"have i not informed thee that i have it in contemplation to obtain for
thee the hand of a king's daughter of marvellous beauty and
accomplishments?"

"you know perfectly well you never mentioned it before," said horace,
while sylvia gave a little low cry.

"repine not, o damsel," counselled the jinnee, "since it is for his
welfare. for, though as yet he believeth it not, when he beholds the
resplendent beauty of her countenance he will swoon away with delight
and forget thy very existence."

"i shall do nothing of the sort," said horace, savagely. "just
understand that i don't intend to marry any princess. you may prevent
me--in fact, you _have_--from marrying this lady, but you can't force me
to marry anybody else. i defy you!"

"when thou hast seen thy bride's perfections thou wilt need no
compulsion," said fakrash. "and if thou shouldst refuse, know this: that
thou wilt be exposing those who are dear to thee in this household to
calamities of the most unfortunate description."

the awful vagueness of this threat completely crushed horace; he could
not think, he did not even dare to imagine, what consequences he might
bring upon his beloved sylvia and her helpless parents by persisting in
his refusal.

"give me time," he said heavily; "i want to talk this over with you."

"pardon me, ventimore," said the professor, with acidulous politeness;
"but, interesting as the discussion of your matrimonial arrangements is
to you and your--a--protector, i should greatly prefer that you choose
some more fitting place for arriving at a decision which is in the
circumstances a foregone conclusion. i am rather tired and upset, and i
should be obliged if you and this gentleman could bring this most trying
interview to a close as soon as you conveniently can."

"you hear, mr. fakrash?" said horace, between his teeth, "it is quite
time we left. if you go at once, i will follow you very shortly."

"thou wilt find me awaiting thee," answered the jinnee, and, to mrs.
futvoye's and sylvia's alarm, disappeared through one of the bookcases.

"well," said horace, gloomily, "you see how i'm situated? that obstinate
old devil has cornered me. i'm done for!"

"don't say that," said the professor; "you appear to be on the eve of a
most brilliant alliance, in which i am sure you have our best
wishes--the best wishes of us all," he added pointedly.

"sylvia," said horace, still lingering, "before i go, tell me that,
whatever i may have to do, you will understand that--that it will be for
your sake!"

"please don't talk like that," she said. "we may never see one another
again. don't let my last recollection of you be of--of a hypocrite,
horace!"

"a hypocrite!" he cried. "sylvia, this is too much! what have i said or
done to make you think me that?"

"oh, i am not so simple as you suppose, horace," she replied. "i see now
why all this has happened: why poor dad was tormented; why you insisted
on my setting you free. but i would have released you without _that_!
indeed, all this elaborate artifice wasn't in the least necessary!"

"you believe i was an accomplice in that old fool's plot?" he said. "you
believe me such a cur as that?"

"i don't blame you," she said. "i don't believe you could help yourself.
he can make you do whatever he chooses. and then, you are so rich now,
it is natural that you should want to marry some one--some one more
suited to you--like this lovely princess of yours."

"of mine!" groaned the exasperated horace. "when i tell you i've never
even seen her! as if any princess in the world would marry me to please
a jinnee out of a brass bottle! and if she did, sylvia, you can't
believe that any princess would make me forget you!"

"it depends so very much on the princess," was all sylvia could be
induced to say.

"well," said horace, "if that's all the faith you have in me, i suppose
it's useless to say any more. good-bye, mrs. futvoye; good-bye,
professor. i wish i could tell you how deeply i regret all the trouble i
have brought on you by my own folly. all i can say is, that i will bear
anything in future rather than expose you or any of you to the smallest
risk."

"i trust, indeed," said the professor, stiffly, "that you will use all
the influence at your command to secure me from any repetition of an
experience that might well have unmanned a less equable temperament than
my own."

"good-bye, horace," said mrs. futvoye, more kindly. "i believe you are
more to be pitied than blamed, whatever others may think. and _i_ don't
forget--if anthony does--that, but for you, he might, instead of sitting
there comfortably in his armchair, be lashing out with his hind legs and
kicking everything to pieces at this very moment!"

"i deny that i lashed out!" said the professor. "my--a--hind quarters
may have been under imperfect control--but i never lost my reasoning
powers or my good humour for a single instant. i can say that
truthfully."

if the professor could say that truthfully amidst the general wreck in
which he sat, like another marius, he had little to learn in the gentle
art of self-deception; but there was nothing to gain by contradicting
him then.

"good-bye, sylvia," said horace, and held out his hand.

"good-bye," she said, without offering to take it or look at him--and,
after a miserable pause, he left the study. but before he had reached
the front door he heard a swish and swirl of drapery behind him, and
felt her light hand on his arm. "ah, no!" she said, clinging to him, "i
can't let you go like this. i didn't mean all the things i said just
now. i _do_ believe in you, horace--at least, i'll try hard to.... and i
shall always, _always_ love you, horace.... i shan't care--very
much--even if you do forget me, so long as you are happy.... only don't
be _too_ happy. think of me sometimes!"

"i shall _not_ be too happy," he said, as he held her close to his heart
and kissed her pathetically drawn mouth and flushed cheeks. "and i shall
think of you always."

"and you won't fall in love with your princess?" entreated sylvia, at
the end of her altruism. "promise!"

"if i am ever provided with one," he replied, "i shall loathe her--for
not being you. but don't let us lose heart, darling. there must be some
way of talking that old idiot out of this nonsense and bringing him
round to common sense. i'm not going to give in just yet!"

these were brave words--but, as they both felt, the situation had little
enough to warrant them, and, after one last long embrace, they parted,
and he was no sooner on the steps than he felt himself caught up as
before and borne through the air with breathless speed, till he was set
down, he could not have well said how, in a chair in his own
sitting-room at vincent square.

"well," he said, looking at the jinnee, who was standing opposite with a
smile of intolerable complacency, "i suppose you feel satisfied with
yourself over this business?"

"it hath indeed been brought to a favourable conclusion," said fakrash.
"well hath the poet written"

"i don't think i can stand any more 'elegant extracts' this afternoon,"
interrupted horace. "let us come to business. you seem," he went on,
with a strong effort to keep himself in hand, "to have formed some plan
for marrying me to a king's daughter. may i ask you for full
particulars?"

"no honour and advancement can be in excess of thy deserts," answered
the jinnee.

"very kind of you to say so--but you are probably unaware that, as
society is constituted at the present time, the objections to such an
alliance would be quite insuperable."

"for me," said the jinnee, "few obstacles are insuperable. but speak thy
mind freely."

"i will," said horace. "to begin with, no european princess of the blood
royal would entertain the idea for a moment. and if she did, she would
forfeit her rank and cease to be a princess, and i should probably be
imprisoned in a fortress for _lèse majesté_ or something."

"dismiss thy fears, for i do not propose to unite thee to any princess
that is born of mortals. the bride i intend for thee is a jinneeyeh; the
peerless bedeea-el-jemal, daughter of my kinsman shahyal, the ruler of
the blue jann."

"oh, is she, though?" said horace, blankly. "i'm exceedingly obliged,
but, whatever may be the lady's attractions"

"her nose," recited the jinnee, with enthusiasm, "is like unto the keen
edge of a polished sword; her hair resembleth jewels, and her cheeks are
ruddy as wine. she hath heavy lips, and when she looketh aside she
putteth to shame the wild cows...."

"my good, excellent friend," said horace, by no means impressed by this
catalogue of charms, "one doesn't marry to mortify wild cows."

"when she walketh with a vacillating gait," continued fakrash, as though
he had not been interrupted, "the willow branch itself turneth green
with envy."

"personally," said horace, "a waddle doesn't strike me as particularly
fascinating--it's quite a matter of taste. do you happen to have seen
this enchantress lately?"

"my eyes have not been refreshed by her manifold beauties since i was
enclosed by suleyman--whose name be accursed--in the brass bottle of
which thou knowest. why dost thou ask?"

"merely because it occurred to me that, after very nearly three thousand
years, your charming kinswoman may--well, to put it as mildly as
possible, not have altogether escaped the usual effects of time. i mean,
she must be getting on, you know!"

"o, silly-bearded one!" said the jinnee, in half-scornful rebuke; "art
thou, then, ignorant that we of the jinn are not as mortals, that we
should feel the ravages of age?"

"forgive me if i'm personal," said horace; "but surely your own hair
and beard might be described as rather inclining to grey."

"not from age," said fakrash, "this cometh from long confinement."

"i see," said horace. "like the prisoner of chillon. well, assuming that
the lady in question is still in the bloom of early youth, i see one
fatal difficulty to becoming her suitor."

"doubtless," said the jinnee, "thou art referring to jarjarees, the son
of rejmoos, the son of iblees?"

"no, i wasn't," said horace; "because, you see, i don't remember having
ever heard of him. however, he's _another_ fatal difficulty. that makes
two of them."

"surely i have spoken of him to thee as my deadliest foe? it is true
that he is a powerful and vindictive efreet, who hath long persecuted
the beauteous bedeea with hateful attentions. yet it may be possible, by
good fortune, to overthrow him."

"then i gather that any suitor for bedeea's hand would be looked upon as
a rival by the amiable jarjarees?"

"far is he from being of an amiable disposition," answered the jinnee,
simply, "and he would be so transported by rage and jealousy that he
would certainly challenge thee to mortal combat."

"then that settles it," said horace. "i don't think any one can fairly
call me a coward, but i do draw the line at fighting an efreet for the
hand of a lady i've never seen. how do i know he'll fight fair?"

"he would probably appear unto thee first in the form of a lion, and if
he could not thus prevail against thee, transform himself into a
serpent, and then into a buffalo or some other wild beast."

"and i should have to tackle the entire menagerie?" said horace. "why,
my dear sir, i should never get beyond the lion!"

"i would assist thee to assume similar transformations," said the
jinnee, "and thus thou mayst be enabled to defeat him. for i burn with
desire to behold mine enemy reduced to cinders."

"it's much more likely that you would have to sweep _me_ up!" said
horace, who had a strong conviction that anything in which the jinnee
was concerned would be bungled somehow. "and if you're so anxious to
destroy this jarjarees, why don't you challenge him to meet you in some
quiet place in the desert and settle him yourself? it's much more in
your line than it is in mine!"

he was not without hopes that fakrash might act on this suggestion, and
that so he would be relieved of him in the simplest and most
satisfactory way; but any such hopes were as usual doomed to
disappointment.

"it would be of no avail," said the jinnee, "for it hath been written of
old that jarjarees shall not perish save by the hand of a mortal. and i
am persuaded that thou wilt turn out to be that mortal, since thou art
both strong and fearless, and, moreover, it is also predestined that
bedeea shall wed one of the sons of men."

"then," said horace, feeling that this line of defence must be
abandoned, "i fall back on objection number one. even if jarjarees were
obliging enough to retire in my favour, i should still decline to become
the--a--consort of a jinneeyeh whom i've never seen, and don't love."

"thou hast heard of her incomparable charms, and verily the ear may love
before the eye."

"it may," admitted horace, "but neither of _my_ ears is the least in
love at present."

"these reasons are of no value," said fakrash, "and if thou hast none
better"

"well," said ventimore, "i think i have. you profess to be anxious
to--to requite the trifling service i rendered you, though hitherto,
you'll admit yourself, you haven't made a very brilliant success of it.
but, putting the past aside," he continued, with a sudden dryness in his
throat; "putting the past aside, i ask you to consider what possible
benefit or happiness such a match as this--i'm afraid i'm not so
fortunate as to secure your attention?" he broke off, as he observed the
jinnee's eyes beginning to film over in the disagreeable manner
characteristic of certain birds.

"proceed," said fakrash, unskinning his eyes for a second; "i am
hearkening unto thee."

"it seems to me," stammered horace, inconsequently enough, "that all
that time inside a bottle--well, you can't call it _experience_ exactly;
and possibly in the interval you've forgotten all you knew about
feminine nature. i think you _must_ have."

"it is not possible that such knowledge should be forgotten," said the
jinnee, resenting this imputation in quite a human way. "thy words
appear to me to lack sense. interpret them, i pray thee."

"why," explained horace, "you don't mean to tell me that this young and
lovely relation of yours, a kind of immortal, and--and with the devil's
own pride, would be gratified by your proposal to bestow her hand upon
an insignificant and unsuccessful london architect? she'd turn up that
sharp and polished nose of hers at the mere idea of so unequal a match!"

"an excellent rank is that conferred by wealth," remarked the jinnee.

"but i'm _not_ rich, and i've already declined any riches from you,"
said horace. "and, what's more to the point, i'm perfectly and
hopelessly obscure. if you had the slightest sense of humour--which i
fear you have not--you would at once perceive the absurdity of proposing
to unite a radiant, ethereal, superhuman being to a commonplace
professional nonentity in a morning coat and a tall hat. it's really too
ridiculous!"

"what thou hast just said is not altogether without wisdom," said
fakrash, to whom this was evidently a new point of view. "art thou,
indeed, so utterly unknown?"

"unknown?" repeated horace; "i should rather think i was! i'm simply an
inconsiderable unit in the population of the vastest city in the world;
or, rather, not a unit--a cipher. and, don't you see, a man to be worthy
of your exalted kinswoman ought to be a celebrity. there are plenty of
them about."

"what meanest thou by a celebrity?" inquired fakrash, falling into the
trap more readily than horace had ventured to hope.

"oh, well, a distinguished person, whose name is on everybody's lips,
who is honoured and praised by all his fellow-citizens. now, _that_ kind
of man no jinneeyeh could look down upon."

"i perceive," said fakrash, thoughtfully. "yes, i was in danger of
committing a rash action. how do men honour such distinguished
individuals in these days?"

"they generally overfeed them," said horace. "in london the highest
honour a hero can be paid is to receive the freedom of the city, which
is only conferred in very exceptional cases, and for some notable
service. but, of course, there are other sorts of celebrities, as you
could see if you glanced through the society papers."

"i cannot believe that thou, who seemest a gracious and talented young
man, can be indeed so obscure as thou hast represented."

"my good sir, any of the flowers that blush unseen in the desert air, or
the gems concealed in ocean caves, so excellently described by one of
our poets, could give me points and a beating in the matter of
notoriety. i'll make you a sporting offer. there are over five million
inhabitants in this london of ours. if you go out into the streets and
ask the first five hundred you meet whether they know me, i don't mind
betting you--what shall i say? a new hat--that you won't find half a
dozen who've ever even heard of my existence. why not go out and see for
yourself?"

to his surprise and gratification the jinnee took this seriously. "i
will go forth and make inquiry," he said, "for i desire further
enlightenment concerning thy statements. but, remember," he added:
"should i still require thee to wed the matchless bedeea-el-jemal, and
thou shouldst disobey me, thou wilt bring disaster, not on thine own
head, but on those thou art most desirous of protecting."

"yes, so you told me before," said horace, brusquely. "good evening."
but fakrash was already gone. in spite of all he had gone through and
the unknown difficulties before him, ventimore was seized with what
uncle remus calls "a spell of the dry grins" at the thought of the
probable replies that the jinnee would meet with in the course of his
inquiries. "i'm afraid he won't be particularly impressed by the
politeness of a london crowd," he thought; "but at least they'll
convince him that i am not exactly a prominent citizen. then he'll give
up this idiotic match of his--i don't know, though. he's such a
pig-headed old fool that he may stick to it all the same. i may find
myself encumbered with a jinneeyeh bride several centuries my senior
before i know where i am. no, i forget; there's the jealous jarjarees to
be polished off first. i seem to remember something about a quick-change
combat with an efreet in the "arabian nights." i may as well look it up,
and see what may be in store for me."

and after dinner he went to his shelves and took down lane's
three-volume edition of "the arabian nights," which he set himself to
study with a new interest. it was long since he had looked into these
wondrous tales, old beyond all human calculation, and fresher, even now,
than the most modern of successful romances. after all, he was tempted
to think, they might possess quite as much historical value as many
works with graver pretentions to accuracy.

he found a full account of the combat with the efreet in "the story of
the second royal mendicant" in the first volume, and was unpleasantly
surprised to discover that the efreet's name was actually given as
"jarjarees, the son of rejmoos, the son of iblees"--evidently the same
person to whom fakrash had referred as his bitterest foe. he was
described as "of hideous aspect," and had, it seemed, not only carried
off the daughter of the lord of the ebony island on her wedding night,
but, on discovering her in the society of the royal mendicant, had
revenged himself by striking off her hands, her feet, and her head, and
transforming his human rival into an ape. "between this fellow and old
fakrash," he reflected ruefully, at this point, "i seem likely to have a
fairly lively time of it!"

he read on till he reached the memorable encounter between the king's
daughter and jarjarees, who presented himself "in a most hideous shape,
with hands like winnowing forks, and legs like masts, and eyes like
burning torches"--which was calculated to unnerve the stoutest novice.
the efreet began by transforming himself from a lion to a scorpion, upon
which the princess became a serpent; then he changed to an eagle, and
she to a vulture; he to a black cat, and she to a cock; he to a fish,
and she to a larger fish still.

"if fakrash can shove me through all that without a fatal hitch
somewhere," ventimore told himself, "i shall be agreeably disappointed
in him," but, after reading a few more lines, he cheered up. for the
efreet finished as a flame, and the princess as a "body of fire." "and
when we looked towards him," continued the narrator, "we perceived that
he had become a heap of ashes."

"come," said horace to himself, "that puts jarjarees out of action, any
way! the odd thing is that fakrash should never have heard of it."

but, as he saw on reflection, it was not so very odd, after all, as the
incident had probably happened after the jinnee had been consigned to
his brass bottle, where intelligence of any kind would be most unlikely
to reach him.

he worked steadily through the whole of the second volume and part of
the third; but, although he picked up a certain amount of information
upon oriental habits and modes of thought and speech which might come in
useful later, it was not until he arrived at the 24th chapter of the
third volume that his interest really revived.

for the 24th chapter contained "the story of seyf-el-mulook and
bedeea-el-jemal," and it was only natural that he should be anxious to
know all that there was to know concerning the antecedents of one who
might be his _fiancée_ before long. he read eagerly.

bedeea, it appeared, was the lovely daughter of shahyal, one of the
kings of the believing jann; her father--not fakrash himself, as the
jinnee had incorrectly represented--had offered her in marriage to no
less a personage than king solomon himself, who, however, had preferred
the queen of sheba. seyf, the son of the king of egypt, afterwards fell
desperately in love with bedeea, but she and her grandmother both
declared that between mankind and the jann there could be no agreement.

"and seyf was a king's son!" commented horace. "i needn't alarm myself.
she wouldn't be likely to have anything to say to _me_. it's just as i
told fakrash."

his heart grew lighter still as he came to the end, for he learnt that,
after many adventures which need not be mentioned here, the devoted seyf
did actually succeed in gaining the proud bedeea as his wife. "even
fakrash could not propose to marry me to some one who has a husband
already," he thought. "still, she _may_ be a widow!"

to his relief, however, the conclusion ran thus; "seyf-el-mulook lived
with bedeea-el-jemal a most pleasant and agreeable life ... until they
were visited by the terminator of delights and the separator of
companions."

"if that means anything at all," he reasoned, "it means that seyf and
bedeea are both deceased. even jinneeyeh seem to be mortal. or perhaps
she became so by marrying a mortal; i dare say that fakrash himself
wouldn't have lasted all this time if he hadn't been bottled, like a
tinned tomato. but i'm glad i found this out, because fakrash is
evidently unaware of it, and, if he _should_ persist in any more of this
nonsense, i think i see my way now to getting the better of him."

so, with renewed hope and in vastly improved spirits, he went to bed and
was soon sound asleep.

chapter xv

blushing honours

it was rather late the next morning when ventimore opened his eyes, to
discover the jinnee standing by the foot of his bed. "oh, it's _you_, is
it?" he said sleepily. "how did you--a--get on last night?"

"i gained such information as i desired," said fakrash, guardedly; "and
now, for the last time, i am come to ask thee whether thou wilt still
persist in refusing to wed the illustrious bedeea-el-jemal? and have a
care how thou answerest."

"so you haven't given up the idea?" said horace. "well, since you make
such a point of it, i'll meet you as far as this. if you produce the
lady, and she consents to marry me, i won't decline the honour. but
there's one condition i really _must_ insist on."

"it is not for thee to make stipulations. still, yet this once i will
hear thee."

"i'm sure you'll see that it's only fair. supposing, for any reason, you
can't persuade the princess to meet me within a reasonable time--shall
we say a week?"

"thou shalt be admitted to her presence within twenty-four hours," said
the jinnee.

"that's better still. then, if i don't see her within twenty-four hours,
i am to be at liberty to infer that the negotiations are off, and i may
marry anybody else i please, without any opposition from you? is that
understood?"

"it is agreed," said fakrash, "for i am confident that bedeea will
accept thee joyfully."

"we shall see," said horace. "but it might be as well if you went and
prepared her a little. i suppose you know where to find her--and you've
only twenty-four hours, you know."

"more than is needed," answered the jinnee, with such childlike
confidence, that horace felt almost ashamed of so easy a victory. "but
the sun is already high. arise, my son, put on these robes"--and with
this he flung on the bed the magnificent raiment which ventimore had
last worn on the night of his disastrous entertainment--"and when thou
hast broken thy fast, prepare to accompany me."

"before i agree to that," said horace, sitting up in bed, "i should like
to know where you're taking me to."

"obey me without demur," said fakrash, "or thou knowest the
consequences."

it seemed to horace that it was as well to humour him, and he got up
accordingly, washed and shaved, and, putting on his dazzling robe of
cloth-of-gold thickly sewn with gems, he joined fakrash--who, by the
way, was similarly, if less gorgeously, arrayed--in the sitting-room, in
a state of some mystification.

"eat quickly," commanded the jinnee, "for the time is short." and
horace, after hastily disposing of a cold poached egg and a cup of
coffee, happened to go to the windows.

"good heavens!" he cried. "what does all this mean?"

he might well ask. on the opposite side of the road, by the railings of
the square, a large crowd had collected, all staring at the house in
eager expectation. as they caught sight of him they raised a cheer,
which caused him to retreat in confusion, but not before he had seen a
great golden chariot with six magnificent coal-black horses, and a suite
of swarthy attendants in barbaric liveries, standing by the pavement
below. "whose carriage is that?" he asked.

"it belongs to thee," said the jinnee; "descend then, and make thy
progress in it through the city."

"i will not," said horace. "even to oblige you i simply can't drive
along the streets in a thing like the band-chariot of a travelling
circus."

"it is necessary," declared fakrash. "must i again recall to thee the
penalty of disobedience?"

"oh, very well," said horace, irritably. "if you insist on my making a
fool of myself, i suppose i must. but where am i to drive, and why?"

"that," replied fakrash, "thou shalt discover at the fitting moment."
and so, amidst the shouts of the spectators, ventimore climbed up into
the strange-looking vehicle, while the jinnee took his seat by his side.
horace had a parting glimpse of mr. and mrs. rapkin's respective noses
flattened against the basement window, and then two dusky slaves mounted
to a seat at the back of the chariot, and the horses started off at a
stately trot in the direction of rochester row.

"i think you might tell me what all this means," he said. "you've no
conception what an ass i feel, stuck up here like this!"

"dismiss bashfulness from thee, since all this is designed to render
thee more acceptable in the eyes of the princess bedeea," said the
jinnee.

horace said no more, though he could not but think that this parade
would be thrown away.

but as they turned into victoria street and seemed to be heading
straight for the abbey, a horrible thought occurred to him. after all,
his only authority for the marriage and decease of bedeea was the
"arabian nights," which was not unimpeachable evidence. what if she were
alive and waiting for the arrival of the bridegroom? no one but fakrash
would have conceived such an idea as marrying him to a jinneeyeh in
westminster abbey; but he was capable of any extravagance, and there
were apparently no limits to his power.

"mr. fakrash," he said hoarsely, "surely this isn't my--my wedding day?
you're not going to have the ceremony _there_?"

"nay," said the jinnee, "be not impatient. for this edifice would be
totally unfitted for the celebration of such nuptials as thine."

as he spoke, the chariot left the abbey on the right and turned down the
embankment. the relief was so intense that horace's spirits rose
irrepressibly. it was absurd to suppose that even fakrash could have
arranged the ceremony in so short a time. he was merely being taken for
a drive, and fortunately his best friends could not recognise him in his
oriental disguise. and it was a glorious morning, with a touch of frost
in the air and a sky of streaky turquoise and pale golden clouds; the
broad river glittered in the sunshine; the pavements were lined with
admiring crowds, and the carriage rolled on amidst frantic enthusiasm,
like some triumphal car.

"how they're cheering us!" said horace. "why, they couldn't make more
row for the lord mayor himself."

"what is this lord mayor of whom thou speakest?" inquired fakrash.

"the lord mayor?" said horace. "oh, he's unique. there's nobody in the
world quite like him. he administers the law, and if there's any
distress in any part of the earth he relieves it. he entertains monarchs
and princes and all kinds of potentates at his banquets, and altogether
he's a tremendous swell."

"hath he dominion over the earth and the air and all that is therein?"

"within his own precincts, i believe he has," said horace, rather
lazily, "but i really don't know precisely how wide his powers are." he
was vainly trying to recollect whether such matters as sky-signs,
telephones, and telegraphs in the city were within the lord mayor's
jurisdiction or the county council's.

fakrash remained silent just as they were driving underneath charing
cross railway bridge, when he started perceptibly at the thunder of the
trains overhead and the piercing whistles of the engines. "tell me," he
said, clutching horace by the arm, "what meaneth this?"

"you don't mean to say," said horace, "that you have been about london
all these days, and never noticed things like these before?"

"till now," said the jinnee, "i have had no leisure to observe them and
discover their nature."

"well," said horace, anxious to let the jinnee see that he had not the
monopoly of miracles, "since your days we have discovered how to tame or
chain the great forces of nature and compel them to do our will. we
control the spirits of earth, air, fire, and water, and make them give
us light and heat, carry our messages, fight our quarrels for us,
transport us wherever we wish to go, with a certainty and precision that
throw even your performances, my dear sir, entirely into the shade."

considering what a very large majority of civilised persons would be as
powerless to construct the most elementary machine as to create the
humblest kind of horse, it is not a little odd how complacently we
credit ourselves with all the latest achievements of our generation.
most of us accept the amazement of the simple-minded barbarian on his
first introduction to modern inventions as a gratifying personal
tribute: we feel a certain superiority, even if we magnanimously refrain
from boastfulness. and yet our own particular share in these discoveries
is limited to making use of them under expert guidance, which any
barbarian, after overcoming his first terror, is quite as competent to
do as we are.

it is a harmless vanity enough, and especially pardonable in ventimore's
case, when it was so desirable to correct any tendency to "uppishness"
on the part of the jinnee.

"and doth the lord mayor dispose of these forces at his will?" inquired
fakrash, on whom ventimore's explanation had evidently produced some
impression.

"certainly," said horace; "whenever he has occasion."

the jinnee seemed engrossed in his own thoughts, for he said no more
just then.

they were now nearing st. paul's cathedral, and horace's first suspicion
returned with double force.

"mr. fakrash, answer me," he said. "is this my wedding day or not? if it
is, it's time i was told!"

"not yet," said the jinnee, enigmatically, and indeed it proved to be
another false alarm, for they turned down cannon street and towards the
mansion house.

"perhaps you can tell me why we're going through victoria street, and
what all this crowd has come out for?" asked ventimore. for the throng
was denser than ever; the people surged and swayed in serried ranks
behind the city police, and gazed with a wonder and awe that for once
seemed to have entirely silenced the cockney instinct of _persiflage_.

"for what else but to do thee honour?" answered fakrash.

"what bosh!" said horace. "they mistake me for the shah or somebody--and
no wonder, in this get-up."

"not so," said the jinnee. "thy names are familiar to them."

horace glanced up at the hastily improvised decorations; on one large
strip of bunting which spanned the street he read: "welcome to the
city's most distinguished guest!" "they can't mean me," he thought; and
then another legend caught his eye: "well done, ventimore!" and an
enthusiastic householder next door had burst into poetry and displayed
the couplet--

"would we had twenty more
like horace ventimore!"

"they _do_ mean me!" he exclaimed. "now, mr. fakrash, _will_ you kindly
explain what tomfoolery you've been up to now? i know you're at the
bottom of this business."

it struck him that the jinnee was slightly embarrassed. "didst thou not
say," he replied, "that he who should receive the freedom of the city
from his fellow-men would be worthy of bedeea-el-jemal?"

"i may have said something of the sort. but, good heavens! you don't
mean that you have contrived that _i_ should receive the freedom of the
city?"

"it was the easiest affair possible," said the jinnee, but he did not
attempt to meet horace's eye.

"was it, though?" said horace, in a white rage. "i don't want to be
inquisitive, but i should like to know what i've done to deserve it?"

"why trouble thyself with the reason? let it suffice thee that such
honour is bestowed upon thee."

by this time the chariot had crossed cheapside and was entering king
street.

"this really won't do!" urged horace. "it's not fair to me. either i've
done something, or you must have made the corporation _believe_ i've
done something, to be received like this. and, as we shall be in the
guildhall in a very few seconds, you may as well tell me what it is!"

"regarding that matter," replied the jinnee, in some confusion, "i am
truly as ignorant as thyself."

as he spoke they drove through some temporary wooden gates into the
courtyard, where the honourable artillery company presented arms to
them, and the carriage drew up before a large marquee decorated with
shields and clustered banners.

"well, mr. fakrash," said horace, with suppressed fury, as he alighted,
"you have surpassed yourself this time. you've got me into a nice
scrape, and you'll have to pull me through it as well as you can."

"have no uneasiness," said the jinnee, as he accompanied his _protégé_
into the marquee, which was brilliant with pretty women in smart frocks,
officers in scarlet tunics and plumed hats, and servants in state
liveries.

their entrance was greeted by a politely-subdued buzz of applause and
admiration, and an official, who introduced himself as the prime warden
of the candlestick-makers' company, advanced to meet them. "the lord
mayor will receive you in the library," he said. "if you will have the
kindness to follow me"

horace followed him mechanically. "i'm in for it now," he thought,
"whatever it is. if i can only trust fakrash to back me up--but i'm
hanged if i don't believe he's more nervous than i am!"

as they came into the noble library of the guildhall a fine string band
struck up, and horace, with the jinnee in his rear, made his way through
a lane of distinguished spectators towards a dais, on the steps of
which, in his gold-trimmed robes and black-feather hat, stood the lord
mayor, with his sword and mace-bearers on either hand, and behind him a
row of beaming sheriffs.

a truly stately and imposing figure did the chief magistrate for that
particular year present: tall, dignified, with a lofty forehead whose
polished temples reflected the light, an aquiline nose, and piercing
black eyes under heavy white eyebrows, a frosty pink in his wrinkled
cheeks, and a flowing silver beard with a touch of gold still lingering
under the lower lip: he seemed, as he stood there, a worthy
representative of the greatest and richest city in the world.

horace approached the steps with an unpleasant sensation of weakness at
the knees, and no sort of idea what he was expected to do or say when he
arrived.

and, in his perplexity, he turned for support and guidance to his
self-constituted mentor--only to discover that the jinnee, whose
short-sightedness and ignorance had planted him in this present false
position, had mysteriously and perfidiously disappeared, and left him to
grapple with the situation single-handed.

chapter xvi

a killing frost

fortunately for ventimore, the momentary dismay he had felt on
finding himself deserted by his unfathomable jinnee at the very
outset of the ceremony passed unnoticed, as the prime warden of the
candlestick-makers' company immediately came to his rescue by briefly
introducing him to the lord mayor, who, with dignified courtesy, had
descended to the lowest step of the dais to receive him.

"mr. ventimore," said the chief magistrate, cordially, as he pressed
horace's hand, "you must allow me to say that i consider this one of the
greatest privileges--if not _the_ greatest privilege--that have fallen
to my lot during a term of office in which i have had the honour of
welcoming more than the usual number of illustrious visitors."

"my lord mayor," said horace, with absolute sincerity, "you really
overwhelm me. i--i only wish i could feel that i had done anything to
deserve this--this magnificent compliment!"

"ah!" replied the lord mayor, in a paternally rallying tone. "modest, my
dear sir, i perceive. like all truly great men! a most admirable trait!
permit me to present you to the sheriffs."

the sheriffs appeared highly delighted. horace shook hands with both of
them; indeed, in the flurry of the moment he very nearly offered to do
so with the sword and mace bearers as well, but their hands were, as it
happened, otherwise engaged.

"the actual presentation," said the lord mayor, "takes place in the
great hall, as you are doubtless aware."

"i--i have been given to understand so," said horace, with a sinking
heart--for he had begun to hope that the worst was over.

"but before we adjourn," said his host, "you will let me tempt you to
partake of some slight refreshment--just a snack?"

horace was not hungry, but it occurred to him that he might get through
the ceremony with more credit after a glass of champagne; so he accepted
the invitation, and was conducted to an extemporised buffet at one end
of the library, where he fortified himself for the impending ordeal with
a _caviare_ sandwich and a bumper of the driest champagne in the
corporation cellars.

"they talk of abolishing us," said the lord mayor, as he took an anchovy
on toast; "but i maintain, mr. ventimore--i maintain that we, with our
ancient customs, our time-honoured traditions, form a link with the
past, which a wise statesman will preserve, if i may employ a somewhat
vulgar term, untinkered with."

horace agreed, remembering a link with a far more ancient past with
which he devoutly wished he had refrained from tinkering.

"talking of ancient customs," the lord mayor continued, with an odd
blend of pride and apology, "you will shortly have an illustration of
our antiquated procedure, which may impress you as quaint."

horace, feeling absolutely idiotic, murmured that he felt sure it would
do that.

"before presenting you for the freedom, the prime warden and five
officials of the candlestick-makers' company will give their testimony
as compurgators in your favour, making oath that you are 'a man of good
name and fame,' and that (you will be amused at this, mr.
ventimore)--that you 'do desire the freedom of this city, whereby to
defraud the queen or the city.' ha, ha! curious way of putting it, is it
not?"

"very," said horace, guiltily, and not a little concerned on the
official's account.

"a mere form!" said the lord mayor; "but i for one, mr. ventimore--i for
one should be sorry to see the picturesque old practices die out. to my
mind," he added, as he finished a _pâté de foie gras_ sandwich, "the
modern impatience to sweep away all the ancient landmarks (whether they
be superannuated or not) is one of the most disquieting symptoms of the
age. you won't have any more champagne? then i think we had better be
making our way to the great hall for the event of the day."

"i'm afraid," said horace, with a sudden consciousness of his
incongruously oriental attire--"i'm afraid this is not quite the sort of
dress for such a ceremony. if i had known"

"now, don't say another word!" said the lord mayor. "your costume is
very nice--very nice indeed, and--and most appropriate, i am sure. but i
see the city marshal is waiting for us to head the procession. shall we
lead the way?"

the band struck up the march of the priests from _athalie_, and horace,
his head in a whirl, walked with his host, followed by the city lands
committee, the sheriffs, and other dignitaries, through the art gallery
and into the great hall, where their entrance was heralded by a flourish
of trumpets.

the hall was crowded, and ventimore found himself the object of a
popular demonstration which would have filled him with joy and pride if
he could only have felt that he had done anything whatever to justify
it, for it was ridiculous to suppose that he had rendered himself a
public benefactor by restoring a convicted jinnee to freedom and society
generally.

his only consolation was that the english are a race not given to
effusiveness without very good reason, and that before the ceremony was
over he would be enabled to gather what were the particular services
which had excited such unbounded enthusiasm.

meanwhile he stood there on the crimson-draped and flower-bedecked dais,
bowing repeatedly, and trusting that he did not look so forlornly
foolish as he felt. a long shaft of sunlight struck down between the
gothic rafters, and dappled the brown stone walls with patches of gold;
the electric lights in the big hooped chandeliers showed pale and feeble
against the subdued glow of the stained glass; the air was heavy with
the scent of flowers and essences. then there was a rustle of
expectation in the audience, and a pause, in which it seemed to horace
that everybody on the dais was almost as nervous and at a loss what to
do next as he was himself. he wished with all his soul that they would
hurry the ceremony through, anyhow, and let him go.

at length the proceedings began by a sort of solemn affectation of
having merely met there for the ordinary business of the day, which to
horace just then seemed childish in the extreme; it was resolved that
"items 1 to 4 on the agenda need not be discussed," which brought them
to item 5.

item 5 was a resolution, read by the town clerk, that "the freedom of
the city should be presented to horace ventimore, esq., citizen and
candlestick-maker" (which last horace was not aware of being, but
supposed vaguely that it had been somehow managed while he was at the
buffet in the library), "in recognition of his services"--the resolution
ran, and horace listened with all his ears--"especially in connection
with ..." it was most unfortunate--but at this precise point the
official was seized with an attack of coughing, in which all was lost
but the conclusion of the sentence, " ... that have justly entitled him
to the gratitude and admiration of his fellow-countrymen."

then the six compurgators came forward and vouched for ventimore's
fitness to receive the freedom. he had painful doubts whether they
altogether understood what a responsibility they were undertaking--but
it was too late to warn them and he could only trust that they knew more
of their business than he did.

after this the city chamberlain read him an address, to which horace
listened in resigned bewilderment. the chamberlain referred to the
unanimity and enthusiasm with which the resolution had been carried, and
said that it was his pleasing and honourable duty, as the mouthpiece of
that ancient city, to address what he described with some inadequacy as
"a few words" to one by adding whose name to their roll of freemen the
corporation honoured rather themselves than the recipient of their
homage.

it was flattering, but to horace's ear the phrases sounded excessive,
almost fulsome--though, of course, that depended very much on what he
had done, which he had still to ascertain. the orator proceeded to read
him the "illustrious list of london's roll of fame," a recital which
made horace shiver with apprehension. for what names they were! what
glorious deeds they had performed! how was it possible that he--plain
horace ventimore, a struggling architect who had missed his one great
chance--could have achieved (especially without even being aware of it)
anything that would not seem ludicrously insignificant by comparison?

he had a morbid fancy that the marble goddesses, or whoever they were,
at the base of nelson's monument opposite, were regarding him with stony
disdain and indignation; that the statue of wellington knew him for an
arrant impostor, and averted his head with cold contempt; and that the
effigy of lord mayor beckford on the right of the dais would come to
life and denounce him in another moment.

"turning now to your own distinguished services," he suddenly heard the
city chamberlain resuming, "you are probably aware, sir, that it is
customary on these occasions to mention specifically the particular
merit which had been deemed worthy of civic recognition."

horace was greatly relieved to hear it, for it struck him as a most
sensible and, in his own particular case, essential formality.

"but, on the present occasion, sir," proceeded the speaker, "i feel, as
all present must feel, that it would be unnecessary--nay, almost
impertinent--were i to weary the public ear by a halting recapitulation
of deeds with which it is already so appreciatively familiar." at this
he was interrupted by deafening and long-continued applause, at the end
of which he continued: "i have only therefore, to greet you in the name
of the corporation, and to offer you the right hand of fellowship as a
freeman, and citizen, and candlestick-maker of london."

as he shook hands he presented horace with a copy of the oath of
allegiance, intimating that he was to read it aloud. naturally,
ventimore had not the least objection to swear to be good and true to
our sovereign lady queen victoria, or to be obedient to the lord mayor,
and warn him of any conspiracies against the queen's peace which might
chance to come under his observation; so he took the oath cheerfully
enough, and hoped that this was really the end of the ceremony.

however, to his great chagrin and apprehension, the lord mayor rose with
the evident intention of making a speech. he said that the conclusion of
the city to bestow the highest honour in their gift upon mr. horace
ventimore had been--here he hesitated--somewhat hastily arrived at.
personally, he would have liked a longer time to prepare, to make the
display less inadequate to, and worthier of, this exceptional occasion.
he thought that was the general feeling. (it evidently was, judging from
the loud and unanimous cheering). however, for reasons which--for
reasons with which they were as well acquainted as himself, the notice
had been short. the corporation had yielded (as they always did, as it
would always be their pride and pleasure to yield) to popular pressure
which was practically irresistible, and had done the best they could in
the limited--he might almost say the unprecedentedly limited--period
allowed them. the proudest leaf in mr. ventimore's chaplet of laurels
to-day was, he would venture to assert, the sight of the extraordinary
enthusiasm and assemblage, not only in that noble hall, but in the
thoroughfares of this mighty metropolis. under the circumstances, this
was a marvellous tribute to the admiration and affection which mr.
ventimore had succeeded in inspiring in the great heart of the people,
rich and poor, high and low. he would not detain his hearers any longer;
all that remained for him to do was to ask mr. ventimore's acceptance of
a golden casket containing the roll of freedom, and he felt sure that
their distinguished guest, before proceeding to inscribe his name on the
register, would oblige them all by some account from his own lips of--of
the events in which he had figured so prominently and so creditably.

horace received the casket mechanically; there was a universal cry of
"speech!" from the audience, to which he replied by shaking his head in
helpless deprecation--but in vain; he found himself irresistibly pressed
towards the rail in front of the dais, and the roar of applause which
greeted him saved him from all necessity of attempting to speak for
nearly two minutes.

during that interval he had time to clear his brain and think what he
had better do or say in his present unenviable dilemma. for some time
past a suspicion had been growing in his mind, until it had now almost
swollen into certainty. he felt that, before he compromised himself, or
allowed his too generous entertainers to compromise themselves
irretrievably, it was absolutely necessary to ascertain his real
position, and, to do that, he must make some sort of speech. with this
resolve, all his nervousness and embarrassment and indecision melted
away; he faced the assembly coolly and gallantly, convinced that his
best alternative now lay in perfect candour.

"my lord mayor, my lords, ladies, and gentlemen," he began, in a clear
voice which penetrated to the farthest gallery and commanded instant
attention. "if you expect to hear from me any description of what i've
done to be received like this, i'm afraid you will be disappointed. for
my own belief is that i've done nothing whatever."

there was a general outcry of "no, no!" at this, and a fervid murmur of
protest.

"it's all very well to say 'no, no,'" said horace, "and i am extremely
grateful to you all for the interruption. still, i can only repeat that
i am absolutely unaware of having ever rendered my country, or this
great city, a single service deserving of the slightest acknowledgment.
i wish i could feel i had--but the truth is that, if i have, the fact
has entirely slipped from my memory."

again there were murmurs, this time with a certain under-current of
irritation; and he could hear the lord mayor behind him remarking to the
city chamberlain that this was not at all the kind of speech for the
occasion.

"i know what you're thinking," said horace. "you're thinking this is
mock modesty on my part. but it's nothing of the sort. _i_ don't know
what i've done--but i presume you are all better informed. because the
corporation wouldn't have given me that very charming casket--you
wouldn't all of you be here like this--unless you were under a strong
impression that i'd done _something_ to deserve it." at this there was a
fresh outburst of applause. "just so," said horace, calmly. "well, now,
will any of you be kind enough to tell me, in a few words, _what_ you
suppose i've done?"

there was a dead silence, in which every one looked at his or her
neighbour and smiled feebly.

"my lord mayor," continued horace, "i appeal to you to tell me and this
distinguished assembly why on earth we're all here!"

the lord mayor rose. "i think it sufficient to say," he announced with
dignity, "that the corporation and myself were unanimously of opinion
that this distinction should be awarded--for reasons which it is
unnecessary and--hum--ha--invidious to enter into here."

"i am sorry," persisted horace, "but i must press your lordship for
those reasons. i have an object.... will the city chamberlain oblige me,
then?... no? well, then, the town clerk?... no?--it's just as i
suspected: none of you can give me your reasons, and shall i tell you
why? because there _aren't_ any.... now, do bear with me for a moment.
i'm quite aware this is very embarrassing for all of you--but remember
that it's infinitely more awkward for _me_! i really cannot accept the
freedom of the city under any suspicion of false pretences. it would be
a poor reward for your hospitality, and base and unpatriotic into the
bargain, to depreciate the value of so great a distinction by permitting
it to be conferred unworthily. if, after you've heard what i am going to
tell you, you still insist on my accepting such an honour, of course i
will not be so ungracious as to refuse it. but i really don't feel that
it would be right to inscribe my name on your roll of fame without some
sort of explanation. if i did, i might, for anything i know,
involuntarily be signing the death-warrant of the corporation!"

there was a breathless hush upon this; the silence grew so intense that
to borrow a slightly involved metaphor from a distinguished friend of
the writer's, you might have picked up a pin in it! horace leaned
sideways against the rail in an easy attitude, so as to face the lord
mayor, as well as a portion of his audience.

"before i go any farther," he said, "will your lordship pardon me if i
suggest that it might be as well to direct that all reporters present
should immediately withdraw?"

the reporters' table was instantly in a stir of anger, and many of the
guests expressed some dissatisfaction. "we, at least," said the lord
mayor, rising, flushed with annoyance, "have no reason to dread
publicity. i decline to make a hole-and-corner affair of this. i shall
give no such orders."

"very well," said horace, when the chorus of approval had subsided. "my
suggestion was made quite as much in the corporation's interests as
mine. i merely thought that, when you all clearly understood how grossly
you've been deluded, you might prefer to have the details kept out of
the newspapers if possible. but if you particularly want them published
over the whole world, why, of course"

an uproar followed here, under cover of which the lord mayor contrived
to give orders to have the doors fastened till further directions.

"don't make this more difficult and disagreeable for me than it is
already!" said horace, as soon as he could obtain a hearing again. "you
don't suppose that i should have come here in this tom-fool's dress,
imposing myself on the hospitality of this great city, if i could have
helped it! if you've been brought here under false pretences, so have i.
if you've been made to look rather foolish, what is _your_ situation to
mine? the fact is, i am the victim of a headstrong force which i am
utterly unable to control...."

upon this a fresh uproar arose, and prevented him from continuing for
some time. "i only ask for fair play and a patient hearing!" he pleaded.
"give me that, and i will undertake to restore you all to good humour
before i have done."

they calmed down at this appeal, and he was able to proceed. "my case is
simply this," he said. "a little time ago i happened to go to an auction
and buy a large brass bottle...."

for some inexplicable reason his last words roused the audience to
absolute frenzy; they would not hear anything about the brass bottle.
every time he attempted to mention it they howled him down, they hissed,
they groaned, they shook their fists; the din was positively deafening.

nor was the demonstration confined to the male portion of the assembly.
one lady, indeed, who is a prominent leader in society, but whose name
shall not be divulged here, was so carried away by her feelings as to
hurl a heavy cut-glass bottle of smelling-salts at horace's offending
head. fortunately for him, it missed him and only caught one of the
officials (horace was not in a mood to notice details very accurately,
but he had a notion that it was the city remembrancer) somewhere about
the region of the watch-pocket.

"_will_ you hear me out?" ventimore shouted. "i'm not trifling. i
haven't told you yet what was inside the bottle. when i opened it, i
found ..."

he got no farther--for, as the words left his lips, he felt himself
seized by the collar of his robe and lifted off his feet by an agency he
was powerless to resist.

up and up he was carried, past the great chandeliers, between the carved
and gilded rafters, pursued by a universal shriek of dismay and horror.
down below he could see the throng of pale, upturned faces, and hear the
wild screams and laughter of several ladies of great distinction in
violent hysterics. and the next moment he was in the glass lantern, and
the latticed panes gave way like tissue paper as he broke through into
the open air, causing the pigeons on the roof to whirr up in a flutter
of alarm.

of course, he knew that it was the jinnee who was abducting him in this
sensational manner, and he was rather relieved than alarmed by fakrash's
summary proceeding, for he seemed, for once, to have hit upon the best
way out of a situation that was rapidly becoming impossible.

chapter xvii

high words

once outside in the open air, the jinnee "towered" like a pheasant shot
through the breast, and horace closed his eyes with a combined
swing-switchback-and-channel-passage sensation during a flight which
apparently continued for hours, although in reality it probably did not
occupy more than a very few seconds. his uneasiness was still further
increased by his inability to guess where he was being taken to--for he
felt instinctively that they were not travelling in the direction of
home.

at last he felt himself set down on some hard, firm surface, and
ventured to open his eyes once more. when he realised where he actually
was, his knees gave way under him, and he was seized with a sudden
giddiness that very nearly made him lose his balance. for he found
himself standing on a sort of narrow ledge or cornice immediately under
the ball at the top of st. paul's.

many feet beneath him spread the dull, leaden summit of the dome, its
raised ridges stretching, like huge serpents over the curve, beyond
which was a glimpse of the green roof of the nave and the two west
towers, with their grey columns and urn-topped buttresses and gilded
pineapples, which shone ruddily in the sun.

he had an impression of ludgate hill and fleet street as a deep, winding
ravine, steeped in partial shadow; of long sierras of roofs and
chimney-pots, showing their sharp outlines above mouse-coloured
smoke-wreaths; of the broad, pearl-tinted river, with oily ripples and a
golden glitter where the sunlight touched it; of the gleaming slope of
mud under the wharves and warehouses on the surrey side; of barges and
steamers moored in black clusters; of a small tug fussing noisily down
the river, leaving a broadening arrow-head in its wake.

cautiously he moved round towards the east, where the houses formed a
blurred mosaic of cream, slate, indigo, and dull reds and browns, above
which slender rose-flushed spires and towers pierced the haze, stained
in countless places by pillars of black, grey, and amber smoke, and
lightened by plumes and jets of silvery steam, till all blended by
imperceptible gradations into a sky of tenderest gold slashed with
translucent blue.

it was a magnificent view, and none the less so because the
indistinctness of all beyond a limited radius made the huge city seem
not only mystical, but absolutely boundless in extent. but although
ventimore was distinctly conscious of all this, he was scarcely in a
state to appreciate its grandeur just then. he was much too concerned
with wondering why fakrash had chosen to plant him up there in so
insecure a position, and how he was ever to be rescued from it, since
the jinnee had apparently disappeared.

he was not far off, however, for presently horace saw him stalk round
the narrow cornice with an air of being perfectly at home on it.

"so there you are!" said ventimore; "i thought you'd deserted me again.
what have you brought me up here for?"

"because i desired to have speech with thee in private," replied the
jinnee.

"we're not likely to be intruded on here, certainly," said horace. "but
isn't it rather exposed, rather public? if we're seen up here, you know,
it will cause a decided sensation."

"i have laid a spell on all below that they should not raise their
eyes. be seated, therefore, and hear my words."

horace lowered himself carefully to a sitting position, so that his legs
dangled in space, and fakrash took a seat by his side. "o, most
indiscreet of mankind!" he began, in an aggrieved tone; "thou hast been
near the committal of a great blunder, and doing ill to thyself and to
me!"

"well, i _do_ like that!" retorted horace; "when you let me in for all
that freedom of the city business, and then sneaked off, leaving me to
get out of it the best way i could, and only came back just as i was
about to explain matters, and carried me up through the roof like a sack
of flour. do you consider that tactful on your part?"

"thou hadst drunk wine and permitted it to creep as far as the place of
secrets."

"only one glass," said horace; "and i wanted it, i can assure you. i was
obliged to make a speech to them, and, thanks to you, i was in such a
hole that i saw nothing for it but to tell the truth."

"veracity, as thou wilt learn," answered the jinnee, "is not invariably
the ship of safety. thou wert about to betray the benefactor who
procured for thee such glory and honour as might well cause the
gall-bladder of lions to burst with envy!"

"if any lion with the least sense of humour could have witnessed the
proceedings," said ventimore, "he might have burst with
laughter--certainly not envy. good lord! fakrash," he cried, in his
indignation, "i've never felt such an absolute ass in my whole life! if
nothing would satisfy you but my receiving the freedom of the city, you
might at least have contrived some decent excuse for it! but you left
out the only point there was in the whole thing--and all for what?"

"what doth it signify why the whole populace should come forth to
acclaim thee and do thee honour, so long as they did so?" said fakrash,
sullenly. "for the report of thy fame would reach bedeea-el-jemal."

"that's just where you're mistaken," said horace. "if you had not been
in too desperate a hurry to make a few inquiries, you would have found
out that you were taking all this trouble for nothing."

"how sayest thou?"

"well, you would have discovered that the princess is spared all
temptation to marry beneath her by the fact that she became the bride of
somebody else about thirty centuries ago. she married a mortal, one
seyf-el-mulook, a king's son, and they've both been dead a considerable
time--another obstacle to your plans."

"it is a lie," declared fakrash.

"if you will take me back to vincent square, i shall be happy to show
you the evidence in your national records," said horace. "and you may be
glad to know that your old enemy, mr. jarjarees, came to a violent end,
after a very sporting encounter with a king's daughter, who, though
proficient in advanced magic, unfortunately perished herself, poor lady,
in the final round."

"i had intended _thee_ to accomplish his downfall," said fakrash.

"i know," said horace. "it was most thoughtful of you. but i doubt if i
should have done it half as well--and it would have probably cost me an
eye, at the very least. it's better as it is."

"and how long hast thou known of these things?"

"only since last night."

"since last night? and thou didst not unfold them unto me till this
instant?"

"i've had such a busy morning, you see," explained horace. "there's been
no time."

"silly-bearded fool that i was to bring this misbegotten dog into the
august presence of the great lord mayor himself (on whom be peace!),"
cried the jinnee.

"i object to being referred to as a misbegotten dog," said horace, "but
with the rest of your remark i entirely concur. i'm afraid the lord
mayor is very far from being at peace just now." he pointed to the steep
roof of the guildhall, with its dormers and fretted pinnacles, and the
slender lantern through which he had so lately made his inglorious exit.
"there's the devil of a row going on under that lantern just now, mr.
fakrash, you may depend upon that. they've locked the doors till they
can decide what to do next--which will take them some time. and it's all
your fault!"

"it was thy doing. why didst thou dare to inform the lord mayor that he
was deceived?"

"why? because i thought he ought to know. because i was bound,
particularly after my oath of allegiance, to warn him of any conspiracy
against him. because i was in such a hat. he'll understand all that--he
won't blame _me_ for this business."

"it is fortunate," observed the jinnee, "that i flew away with thee
before thou couldst pronounce my name."

"you gave yourself away," said horace. "they all saw you, you know. you
weren't flying so particularly fast. they'll recognise you again. if you
_will_ carry off a man from under the lord mayor's very nose, and shoot
up through the roof like a rocket with him, you can't expect to escape
some notice. you see, you happen to be the only unbottled jinnee in this
city."

fakrash shifted his seat on the cornice. "i have committed no act of
disrespect unto the lord mayor," he said, "therefore he can have no just
cause of anger against me."

horace perceived that the jinnee was not altogether at ease, and pushed
his advantage accordingly.

"my dear good old friend," he said, "you don't seem to realise yet what
an awful thing you've done. for your own mistaken purposes, you have
compelled the chief magistrate and the corporation of the greatest city
in the world to make themselves hopelessly ridiculous. they'll never
hear the last of this affair. just look at the crowds waiting patiently
below there. look at the flags. think of that gorgeous conveyance of
yours standing outside the guildhall. think of the assembly inside--all
the most aristocratic, noble, and distinguished personages in the land,"
continued horace, piling it on as he proceeded; "all collected for what?
to be made fools of by a jinnee out of a brass bottle!"

"for their own sakes they will preserve silence," said fakrash, with a
gleam of unwonted shrewdness.

"probably they would hush it up, if they only could," conceded horace.
"but how _can_ they? what are they to say? what plausible explanation
can they give? besides, there's the press: you don't know what the press
is; but i assure you its power is tremendous--it's simply impossible to
keep anything secret from it nowadays. it has eyes and ears everywhere,
and a thousand tongues. five minutes after the doors in that hall are
unlocked (and they can't keep them locked _much_ longer) the reporters
will be handing in their special descriptions of you and your latest
vagaries to their respective journals. within half an hour bills will be
carried through every quarter of london--bills with enormous letters:
'extraordinary scene at the guildhall.' 'strange end to a civic
function.' 'startling appearance of an oriental genie in the city.'
'abduction of a guest of the lord mayor.' 'intense excitement.' 'full
particulars!' and by that time the story will have flashed round the
whole world. 'keep silence,' indeed! do you imagine for a moment that
the lord mayor, or anybody else concerned, however remotely, will ever
forget, or be allowed to forget, such an outrageous incident as this? if
you do, believe me, you're mistaken."

"truly, it would be a terrible thing to incur the wrath of the lord
mayor," said the jinnee, in troubled accents.

"awful!" said horace. "but you seem to have managed it."

"he weareth round his neck a magic jewel, which giveth him dominion
over devils--is it not so?"

"you know best," said horace.

"it was the splendour of that jewel and the majesty of his countenance
that rendered me afraid to enter his presence, lest he should recognise
me for what i am and command me to obey him, for verily his might is
greater even than suleyman's, and his hand heavier upon such of the jinn
as fall into his power!"

"if that's so," said horace, "i should strongly advise you to find some
way of putting things straight before it's too late--you've no time to
lose."

"thou sayest well," said fakrash, springing to his feet, and turning his
face towards cheapside. horace shuffled himself along the ledge in a
seated position after the jinnee, and, looking down between his feet,
could just see the tops of the thin and rusty trees in the churchyard,
the black and serried swarms of foreshortened people in the street, and
the scarlet-rimmed mouths of chimney-pots on the tiled roofs below.

"there is but one remedy i know," said the jinnee, "and it may be that i
have lost power to perform it. yet will i make the endeavour." and,
stretching forth his right hand towards the east, he muttered some kind
of command or invocation.

horace almost fell off the cornice with apprehension of what might
follow. would it be a thunderbolt, a plague, some frightful convulsion
of nature? he felt sure that fakrash would hesitate at no means, however
violent, of burying all traces of his blunder in oblivion, and very
little hope that, whatever he did, it would prove anything but some
worse indiscretion than his previous performances.

happily none of these extreme measures seemed to have occurred to the
jinnee, though what followed was strange and striking enough.

for presently, as if in obedience to the jinnee's weird gesticulations,
a lurid belt of fog came rolling up from the direction of the royal
exchange, swallowing up building after building in its rapid course; one
by one the guildhall, bow church, cheapside itself, and the churchyard
disappeared, and horace, turning his head to the left, saw the murky
tide sweeping on westward, blotting out ludgate hill, the strand,
charing cross, and westminster--till at last he and fakrash were alone
above a limitless plain of bituminous cloud, the only living beings
left, as it seemed, in a blank and silent universe.

"look again!" said fakrash, and horace, looking eastward, saw the spire
of bow church, rosy once more, the guildhall standing clear and intact,
and the streets and house-tops gradually reappearing. only the flags,
with their unrestful shiver and ripple of colour, had disappeared, and,
with them, the waiting crowds and the mounted constables. the ordinary
traffic of vans, omnibuses, and cabs was proceeding as though it had
never been interrupted--the clank and jingle of harness chains, the
cries and whip-crackings of drivers, rose with curious distinctness
above the incessant trampling roar which is the ground-swell of the
human ocean.

"that cloud which thou sawest," said fakrash, "hath swept away with it
all memory of this affair from the minds of every mortal assembled to do
thee honour. see, they go about their several businesses, and all the
past incidents are to them as though they had never been."

it was not often that horace could honestly commend any performance of
the jinnee's, but at this he could not restrain his admiration. "by
jove!" he said, "that certainly gets the lord mayor and everybody else
out of the mess as neatly as possible. i must say, mr. fakrash, it's
much the best thing i've seen you do yet."

"wait," said the jinnee, "for presently thou shalt see me perform a yet
more excellent thing."

there was a most unpleasant green glow in his eyes and a bristle in his
thin beard as he spoke, which suddenly made horace feel uncomfortable.
he did not like the look of the jinnee at all.

"i really think you've done enough for to-day," he said. "and this wind
up here is rather searching. i shan't be sorry to find myself on the
ground again."

"that," replied the jinnee, "thou shalt assuredly do before long, o
impudent and deceitful wretch!" and he laid a long, lean hand on
horace's shoulder.

"he _is_ put out about something!" thought ventimore. "but what?" "my
dear sir," he said aloud, "i don't understand this tone of yours. what
have i done to offend you?"

"divinely gifted was he who said: 'beware of losing hearts in
consequence of injury, for the bringing them back after flight is
difficult.'"

"excellent!" said horace. "but i don't quite see the application."

"the application," explained the jinnee, "is that i am determined to
cast thee down from here with my own hand!"

horace turned faint and dizzy for a moment. then, by a strong effort of
will, he pulled himself together. "oh, come now," he said, "you don't
really mean that, you know. after all your kindness! you're much too
good-natured to be capable of anything so atrocious."

"all pity hath been eradicated from my heart," returned fakrash.
"therefore prepare to die, for thou art presently about to perish in the
most unfortunate manner."

ventimore could not repress a shudder. hitherto he had never been able
to take fakrash quite seriously, in spite of all his supernatural
powers; he had treated him with a half-kindly, half-contemptuous
tolerance, as a well-meaning, but hopelessly incompetent, old foozle.
that the jinnee should ever become malevolent towards him had never
entered his head till now--and yet he undoubtedly had. how was he to
cajole and disarm this formidable being? he must keep cool and act
promptly, or he would never see sylvia again.

as he sat there on the narrow ledge, with a faint and not unpleasant
smell of hops saluting his nostrils from some distant brewery, he tried
hard to collect his thoughts, but could not. he found himself, instead,
idly watching the busy, jostling crowd below, who were all unconscious
of the impending drama so high above them. just over the rim of the dome
he could see the opaque white top of a lamp on a shelter, where a pigmy
constable stood, directing the traffic.

would he look up if horace called for help? even if he could, what help
could he render? all he could do would be to keep the crowd back and
send for a covered stretcher. no, he would _not_ dwell on these horrors;
he _must_ fix his mind on some way of circumventing fakrash.

how did the people in "the arabian nights" manage? the fisherman, for
instance? he persuaded _his_ jinnee to return to the bottle by
pretending to doubt whether he had ever really been inside it.

but fakrash, though simple enough in some respects, was not quite such a
fool as that. sometimes the jinn could be mollified and induced to grant
a reprieve by being told stories, one inside the other, like a nest of
oriental boxes. unfortunately fakrash did not seem in the humour for
listening to apologues, and, even if he were, horace could not think of
or improvise any just then. "besides," he thought, "i can't sit up here
telling him anecdotes for ever. i'd almost sooner die!" still, he
remembered that it was generally possible to draw an arabian efreet into
discussion: they all loved argument, and had a rough conception of
justice.

"i think, mr. fakrash," he said, "that, in common fairness, i have a
right to know what offence i have committed."

"to recite thy misdeeds," replied the jinnee, "would occupy much time."

"i don't mind that," said horace, affably. "i can give you as long as
you like. i'm in no sort of a hurry."

"with me it is otherwise," retorted fakrash, making a stride towards
him. "therefore court not life, for thy death hath become unavoidable.'

"before we part," said horace, "you won't refuse to answer one or two
questions?"

"didst thou not undertake never to ask any further favour of me?
moreover, it will avail thee nought. for i am positively determined to
slay thee."

"i demand it," said horace, "in the most great name of the lord mayor
(on whom be peace!)"

it was a desperate shot--but it took effect. the jinnee quailed visibly.

"ask, then," he said; "but briefly, for the time groweth short."

horace determined to make one last appeal to fakrash's sense of
gratitude, since it had always seemed the dominant trait in his
character.

"well," he said, "but for me, wouldn't you be still in that brass
bottle?"

"that," replied the jinnee, "is the very reason why i purpose to destroy
thee!"

"oh!" was all horace could find to say at this most unlooked-for answer.
his sheet anchor, in which he had trusted implicitly, had suddenly
dragged--and he was drifting fast to destruction.

"are there any other questions which thou wouldst ask?" inquired the
jinnee, with grim indulgence; "or wilt thou encounter thy doom without
further procrastination?"

horace was determined not to give in just yet; he had a very bad hand,
but he might as well play the game out and trust to luck to gain a stray
trick.

"i haven't nearly done yet," he said. "and, remember, you've promised to
answer me--in the name of the lord mayor!"

"i will answer one other question, and no more," said the jinnee, in an
inflexible tone; and ventimore realised that his fate would depend upon
what he said next.

chapter xviii

a game of bluff

"thy second question, o pertinacious one?" said the jinnee, impatiently.
he was standing with folded arms looking down on horace, who was still
seated on the narrow cornice, not daring to glance below again, lest he
should lose his head altogether.

"i'm coming to it," said ventimore; "i want to know why you should
propose to dash me to pieces in this barbarous way as a return for
letting you out of that bottle. were you so comfortable in it as all
that?"

"in the bottle i was at least suffered to rest, and none molested me.
but in releasing me thou didst perfidiously conceal from me that
suleyman was dead and gone, and that there reigneth one in his stead
mightier a thousand-fold, who afflicteth our race with labours and
tortures exceeding all the punishments of suleyman."

"what on earth have you got into your head now? you can't mean the lord
mayor?"

"whom else?" said the jinnee, solemnly. "and though, for this once, by a
device i have evaded his vengeance, yet do i know full well that either
by virtue of the magic jewel upon his breast, or through that malignant
monster with the myriad ears and eyes and tongues, which thou callest
'the press,' i shall inevitably fall into his power before long."

for the life of him, in spite of his desperate plight, horace could not
help laughing. "i beg your pardon, mr. fakrash," he said, as soon as he
could speak, "but--the lord mayor! it's really too absurd. why, he
wouldn't hurt a hair on a fly's head!"

"seek not to deceive me further!" said fakrash, furiously. "didst thou
not inform me with thy own mouth that the spirits of earth, air, water,
and fire were subject to his will? have i no eyes? do i not behold from
here the labours of my captive brethren? what are those on yonder
bridges but enslaved jinn, shrieking and groaning in clanking fetters,
and snorting forth steam, as they drag their wheeled burdens behind
them? are there not others toiling, with panting efforts, through the
sluggish waters; others again, imprisoned in lofty pillars, from which
the smoke of their breath ascendeth even unto heaven? doth not the air
throb and quiver with their restless struggles as they writhe below in
darkness and torment? and thou hast the shamelessness to pretend that
these things are done in the lord mayor's own realms without his
knowledge! verily thou must take me for a fool!"

"after all," reflected ventimore, "if he chooses to consider that
railway engines and steamers, and machinery generally, are inhabited by
so many jinn 'doing time,' it's not to my interest to undeceive
him--indeed, it's quite the contrary!"

"i wasn't aware the lord mayor had so much power as all that," he said;
"but very likely you're right. and if you're so anxious to keep in
favour with him, it would be a great mistake to kill me. that _would_
annoy him."

"not so," said the jinnee, "for i should declare that thou hadst spoken
slightingly of him in my hearing, and that i had slain thee on that
account."

"your proper course," said horace, "would be to hand me over to him, and
let _him_ deal with the case. much more regular."

"that may be," said fakrash; "but i have conceived so bitter a hatred to
thee by reason of thy insolence and treachery, that i cannot forego the
delight of slaying thee with my own hand."

"can't you really?" said horace, on the verge of despair. "and _then_,
what will you do?"

"then," replied the jinnee, "i shall flee away to arabia, where i shall
be safe."

"don't you be too sure of that!" said horace. "you see all those wires
stretched on poles down there? those are the pathways of certain jinn
known as electric currents, and the lord mayor could send a message
along them which would be at baghdad before you had flown farther than
folkestone. and i may mention that arabia is now more or less under
british jurisdiction."

he was bluffing, of course, for he knew perfectly well that, even if any
extradition treaty could be put in force, the arrest of a jinnee would
be no easy matter.

"thou art of opinion, then, that i should be no safer in mine own
country?" inquired fakrash.

"i swear by the name of the lord mayor (to whom be all reverence!)" said
horace, "that there is no land you could fly to where you would be any
safer than you are here."

"if i were but sealed up in my bottle once more," said the jinnee,
"would not even the lord mayor have respect unto the seal of suleyman,
and forbear to disturb me?"

"why, of course he would!" cried horace, hardly daring to believe his
ears. "that's really a brilliant idea of yours, my dear mr. fakrash."

"and in the bottle i should not be compelled to work," continued the
jinnee. "for labour of all kinds hath ever been abhorrent unto me."

"i can quite understand that," said horace, sympathetically. "just
imagine your having to drag an excursion train to the seaside on a bank
holiday, or being condemned to print off a cheap comic paper, or even
the _war cry_, when you might be leading a snug and idle existence in
your bottle. if i were you, i should go and get inside it at once.
suppose we go back to vincent square and find it?"

"i shall return to the bottle, since in that alone there is safety,"
said the jinnee. "but i shall return alone."

"alone!" cried horace. "you're not going to leave me stuck up here all
by myself?"

"by no means," said the jinnee. "have i not said that i am about to cast
thee to perdition? too long have i delayed in the accomplishment of this
duty."

once more horace gave himself up for lost; which was doubly bitter, just
when he had begun to consider that the danger was past. but even then,
he was determined to fight to the last.

"one moment," he said. "of course, if you've set your heart on pitching
me over, you must. only--i may be quite mistaken--but i don't quite see
how you are going to manage the rest of your programme without me,
that's all."

"o deficient in intelligence!" cried the jinnee. "what assistance canst
thou render me?"

"well," said horace, "of course, you can get into the bottle
alone--that's simple enough. but the difficulty i see is this: are you
quite sure you can put the cap on yourself--from the _inside_, you
know?" if he can, he thought, "i'm done for!"

"that," began the jinnee, with his usual confidence "will be the easiest
of--nay," he corrected himself, "there be things that not even the jinn
themselves can accomplish, and one of them is to seal a vessel while
remaining in it. i am indebted to thee for reminding me thereof."

"not at all," said ventimore. "i shall be delighted to come and seal you
up comfortably myself."

"again thou speakest folly," exclaimed the jinnee. "how canst thou seal
me up after i have dashed thee into a thousand pieces?"

"that," said horace, with all the urbanity he could command, "is
precisely the difficulty i was trying to convey."

"there will be no difficulty, for as soon as i am in the bottle i shall
summon certain inferior efreets, and they will replace the seal."

"when you are once in the bottle," said horace, at a venture, "you
probably won't be in a position to summon anybody."

"_before_ i get into the bottle, then!" said the jinnee, impatiently.
"thou dost but juggle with words!"

"but about those efreets," persisted horace. "you know what efreets
_are_! how can you be sure that, when they've got you in the bottle,
they won't hand you over to the lord mayor? i shouldn't trust them
myself--but, of course, you know best!"

"whom shall i trust, then?" said fakrash, frowning.

"i'm sure i don't know. it's rather a pity you're so determined to
destroy me, because, as it happens, i'm just the one person living who
could be depended on to seal you up and keep your secret. however,
that's your affair. after all, why should i care what becomes of you? i
shan't be there!"

"even at this hour," said the jinnee, undecidedly, "i might find it in
my heart to spare thee, were i but sure that thou wouldst be faithful
unto me!"

"i should have thought i was more to be trusted than one of your beastly
efreets!" said horace, with well-assumed indifference. "but never mind,
i don't know that i care, after all. i've nothing particular to live for
now. you've ruined me pretty thoroughly, and you may as well finish your
work. i've a good mind to jump over, and save you the trouble. perhaps,
when you see me bouncing down that dome, you'll be sorry!"

"refrain from rashness!" said the jinnee, hastily, without suspecting
that ventimore had no serious intention of carrying out his threat. "if
thou wilt do as thou art bidden, i will not only pardon thee, but grant
thee all that thou desirest."

"take me back to vincent square first," said horace. "this is not the
place to discuss business."

"thou sayest rightly," replied the jinnee; "hold fast to my sleeve, and
i will transport thee to thine abode."

"not till you promise to play fair," said horace, pausing on the brink
of the ledge. "remember, if you let me go now you drop the only friend
you've got in the world!"

"may i be thy ransom!" replied fakrash. "there shall not be harmed a
hair of thy head!"

even then horace had his misgivings; but as there was no other way of
getting off that cornice, he decided to take the risk. and, as it
proved, he acted judiciously, for the jinnee flew to vincent square with
honourable precision, and dropped him neatly into the armchair in which
he had little hoped ever to find himself again.

"i have brought thee hither," said fakrash, "and yet i am persuaded that
thou art even now devising treachery against me, and wilt betray me if
thou canst."

horace was about to assure him once more that no one could be more
anxious than himself to see him safely back in his bottle, when he
recollected that it was impolitic to appear too eager.

"after the way you've behaved," he said, "i'm not at all sure that i
ought to help you. still, i said i would, on certain conditions, and
i'll keep my word."

"conditions!" thundered the jinnee. "wilt thou bargain with me yet
further?"

"my excellent friend," said horace quietly, "you know perfectly well
that you can't get yourself safely sealed up again in that bottle
without my assistance. if you don't like my terms, and prefer to take
your chance of finding an efreet who is willing to brave the lord mayor,
well, you've only to say so."

"i have loaded thee with all manner of riches and favours, and i will
bestow no more upon thee," said the jinnee, sullenly. "nay, in token of
my displeasure, i will deprive thee even of such gifts as thou hast
retained." he pointed his grey forefinger at ventimore, whose turban
and jewelled robes instantly shrivelled into cobwebs and tinder, and
fluttered to the carpet in filmy shreds, leaving him in nothing but his
underclothing.

"that only shows what a nasty temper you're in," said horace, blandly,
"and doesn't annoy me in the least. if you'll excuse me, i'll go and put
on some things i can feel more at home in; and perhaps by the time i
return you'll have cooled down."

he slipped on some clothes hurriedly and re-entered the sitting-room.
"now, mr. fakrash," he said, "we'll have this out. you talk of having
loaded me with benefits. you seem to consider i ought to be grateful to
you. in heaven's name, for what? i've been as forbearing as possible all
this time, because i gave you credit for meaning well. now, i'll speak
plainly. i told you from the first, and i tell you now, that i want no
riches nor honours from you. the one real good turn you did me was
bringing me that client, and you spoilt that because you would insist on
building the palace yourself, instead of leaving it to me! as for the
rest--here am i, a ruined and discredited man, with a client who
probably supposes i'm in league with the devil; with the girl i love,
and might have married, believing that i have left her to marry a
princess; and her father, unable ever to forgive me for having seen him
as a one-eyed mule. in short, i'm in such a mess all round that i don't
care two straws whether i live or die!"

"what is all this to me?" said the jinnee.

"only this--that unless you can see your way to putting things straight
for me, i'm hanged if i take the trouble to seal you up in that bottle!"

"how am _i_ to put things straight for thee?" cried fakrash, peevishly.

"if you could make all those people entirely forget that affair in the
guildhall, you can make my friends forget the brass bottle and
everything connected with it, can't you?"

"there would be no difficulty in that," fakrash admitted.

"well, do it--and i'll swear to seal you up in the bottle exactly as if
you had never been out of it, and pitch you into the deepest part of the
thames, where no one will ever disturb you."

"first produce the bottle, then," said fakrash, "for i cannot believe
but that thou hast some lurking guile in thy heart."

"i'll ring for my landlady and have the bottle brought up," said horace.
"perhaps that will satisfy you? stay, you'd better not let her see you."

"i will render myself invisible," said the jinnee, suiting the action to
his words. "but beware lest thou play me false," his voice continued,
"for i shall hear thee!"

"so you've come in, mr. ventimore?" said mrs. rapkin, as she entered.
"and without the furrin gentleman? i _was_ surprised, and so was rapkin
the same, to see you ridin' off this morning in the gorgious chariot and
'osses, and dressed up that lovely! 'depend upon it,' i says to rapkin,
i says, 'depend upon it, mr. ventimore'll be sent for to buckinham
pallis, if it ain't windsor castle!'"

"never mind that now," said horace, impatiently; "i want that brass
bottle i bought the other day. bring it up at once, please."

"i thought you said the other day you never wanted to set eyes on it
again, and i was to do as i pleased with it, sir?"

"well, i've changed my mind, so let me have it, quick."

"i'm sure i'm very sorry, sir, but that you can't, because rapkin, not
wishful to have the place lumbered up with rubbish, disposed of it on'y
last night to a gentleman as keeps a rag and bone emporium off the
bridge road, and 'alf-a-crown was the most he'd give for it, sir."

"give me his name," said horace.

"dilger, sir--emanuel dilger. when rapkin comes in i'm sure he'd go
round with pleasure, and see about it, if required."

"i'll go round myself," said horace. "it's all right, mrs. rapkin, quite
a natural mistake on your part, but--but i happen to want the bottle
again. you needn't stay."

"o thou smooth-faced and double-tongued one!" said the jinnee, after she
had gone, as he reappeared to view. "did i not foresee that thou wouldst
deal crookedly? restore unto me my bottle!"

"i'll go and get it at once," said horace; "i shan't be five minutes."
and he prepared to go.

"thou shalt not leave this house," cried fakrash, "for i perceive
plainly that this is but a device of thine to escape and betray me to
the press devil!"

"if you can't see," said horace, angrily, "that i'm quite as anxious to
see you safely back in that confounded bottle as ever you can be to get
there, you must be pretty dense! _can't_ you understand? the bottle's
sold, and i can't buy it back without going out. don't be so infernally
unreasonable!"

"go, then," said the jinnee, "and i will await thy return here. but know
this: that if thou delayest long or returnest without my bottle, i shall
know that thou art a traitor, and will visit thee and those who are dear
to thee with the most unpleasant punishments!"

"i'll be back in half an hour, at most," said horace, feeling that this
would allow him ample margin, and thankful that it did not occur to
fakrash to go in person.

he put on his hat, and hurried off in the gathering dusk. he had some
little trouble in finding mr. dilger's establishment, which was a dirty,
dusty little place in a back street, with a few deplorable old chairs,
rickety washstands, and rusty fenders outside, and the interior almost
completely blocked by piles of dingy mattresses, empty clock-cases,
tarnished and cracked mirrors, broken lamps, damaged picture-frames, and
everything else which one would imagine could have no possible value
for any human being. but in all this collection of worthless curios the
brass bottle was nowhere to be seen.

ventimore went in and found a youth of about thirteen straining his eyes
in the fading light over one of those halfpenny humorous journals which,
thanks to an improved system of education, at least eighty per cent. of
our juvenile population are now enabled to appreciate.

"i want to see mr. dilger," he began.

"you can't," said the youth. "'cause he ain't in. he's attending of an
auction."

"when _will_ he be in, do you know?"

"might be back to his tea--but i wasn't to expect him not before
supper."

"you don't happen to have any old metal bottles--copper or--or brass
would do--for sale?"

"you don't git at me like that! bottles is made o' glorss."

"well, a jar, then--a big brass pot--anything of that kind?"

"don't keep 'em," said the boy, and buried himself once more in his copy
of "spicy sniggers."

"i'll just look round," said horace, and began to poke about with a
sinking heart, and a horrid dread that he might have come to the wrong
shop, for the big pot-bellied vessel certainly did not seem to be there.
at last, to his unspeakable joy, he discovered it under a piece of
tattered drugget. "why, this is the sort of thing i meant," he said,
feeling in his pocket and discovering that he had exactly a sovereign.
"how much do you want for it?"

"i dunno," said the boy.

"i don't mind three shillings," said horace, who did not wish to appear
too keen at first.

"i'll tell the guv'nor when he comes in," was the reply, "and you can
look in later."

"i want it at once," insisted horace. "come, i'll give you three-and-six
for it."

"it's more than it's wurf," replied the candid youth.

"perhaps," said horace, "but i'm rather pressed for time. if you'll
change this sovereign, i'll take the bottle away with me."

"you seem uncommon anxious to get 'old on it, mister!" said the boy,
with sudden suspicion.

"nonsense!" said horace. "i live close by, and i thought i might as well
take it, that's all."

"oh, if that's all, you can wait till the guv'nor's in."

"i--i mayn't be passing this way again for some time," said horace.

"bound to be, if you live close by," and the provoking youth returned to
his "sniggers."

"do you call this attending to your master's business?" said horace.
"listen to me, you young rascal. i'll give you five shillings for it.
you're not going to be fool enough to refuse an offer like that?"

"i ain't goin' to be fool enough to refuse it--nor yet i ain't goin' to
be fool enough to take it, 'cause i'm only 'ere to see as nobody don't
come in and sneak fings. i ain't got no authority to sell anyfink, and i
don't know the proice o' nuffink, so there you _'ave_ it."

"take the five shillings," said horace, "and if it's too little i'll
come round and settle with your master later."

"i thought you said you wasn't likely to be porsin' again? no, mister,
you don't kid me that way!"

horace had a mad impulse to snatch up the precious bottle then and there
and make off with it, and might have yielded to the temptation, with
disastrous consequences, had not an elderly man entered the shop at that
moment. he was bent, and wore rather more fluff and flue upon his person
than most well-dressed people would consider necessary, but he came in
with a certain air of authority, nevertheless.

"mr. dilger, sir," piped the youth, "'ere's a gent took a fancy to this
'ere brass pot o' yours. says he _must_ 'ave it. five shillings he'd got
to, but i told him he'd 'ave to wait till you come in."

"quite right, my lad!" said mr. dilger, cocking a watery but sharp old
eye at horace. "five shillings! ah, sir, you can't know much about these
hold brass antiquities to make an orfer like that."

"i know as much as most people," said horace. "but let us say six
shillings."

"couldn't be done, sir; couldn't indeed. why, i give a pound for it
myself at christie's, as sure as i'm standin' 'ere in the presence o' my
maker, and you a sinner!" he declared impressively, if rather
ambiguously.

"your memory is not quite accurate," said horace. "you bought it last
night from a man of the name of rapkin, who lets lodgings in vincent
square, and you paid exactly half a crown for it."

"if you say so i dare say it's correct, sir," said mr. dilger, without
exhibiting the least confusion. "and if i did buy it off mr. rapkin,
he's a respectable party, and ain't likely to have come by it
dishonest."

"i never said he did. what will you take for the thing?"

"well, just look at the work in it. they don't turn out the like o' that
nowadays. dutch, that is; what they used for to put their milk and
such-like in."

"damn it!" said horace, completely losing his temper. "_i_ know what it
was used for. _will_ you tell me what you want for it?"

"i couldn't let a curiosity like that go a penny under thirty
shillings," said mr. dilger, affectionately. "it would be robbin'
myself."

"i'll give you a sovereign for it--there," said horace. "you know best
what profit that represents. that's my last word."

"_my_ last word to that, sir, is good hevenin'," said the worthy man.

"good evening, then," said horace, and walked out of the shop; rather to
bring mr. dilger to terms than because he really meant to abandon the
bottle, for he dared not go back without it, and he had nothing about
him just then on which he could raise the extra ten shillings, supposing
the dealer refused to trust him for the balance--and the time was
growing dangerously short.

fortunately the well-worn ruse succeeded, for mr. dilger ran out after
him and laid an unwashed claw upon his coat-sleeve. "don't go, mister,"
he said; "i like to do business if i can; though, 'pon my word and
honour, a sovereign for a work o' art like that! well, just for luck and
bein' my birthday, we'll call it a deal."

horace handed over the coin, which left him with a few pence. "there
ought to be a lid or stopper of some sort," he said suddenly. "what have
you done with that?"

"no, sir, there you're mistook, you are, indeed. i do assure you you
never see a pot of this partickler pattern with a lid to it. never!"

"oh, don't you, though?" said horace. "i know better. never mind," he
said, as he recollected that the seal was in fakrash's possession. "i'll
take it as it is. don't trouble to wrap it up. i'm in rather a hurry."

it was almost dark when he got back to his rooms, where he found the
jinnee shaking with mingled rage and apprehension.

"no welcome to thee!" he cried. "dilatory dog that thou art! hadst thou
delayed another minute, i would have called down some calamity upon
thee."

"well, you need not trouble yourself to do that now," returned
ventimore. "here's your bottle, and you can creep into it as soon as you
please."

"but the seal!" shrieked the jinnee. "what hast thou done with the seal
which was upon the bottle?"

"why, you've got it yourself, of course," said horace, "in one of your
pockets."

"o thou of base antecedents!" howled fakrash, shaking out his flowing
draperies. "how should _i_ have the seal? this is but a fresh device of
thine to undo me!"

"don't talk rubbish!" retorted horace. "you made the professor give it
up to you yesterday. you must have lost it somewhere or other. never
mind! i'll get a large cork or bung, which will do just as well. and
i've lots of sealing-wax."

"i will have no seal but the seal of suleyman!" declared the jinnee.
"for with no other will there be security. verily i believe that that
accursed sage, thy friend, hath contrived by some cunning to get the
seal once more into his hands. i will go at once to his abode and compel
him to restore it."

"i wouldn't," said horace, feeling extremely uneasy, for it was
evidently a much simpler thing to let a jinnee out of a bottle than to
get him in again. "he's quite incapable of taking it. and if you go out
now you'll only make a fuss and attract the attention of the press,
which i thought you rather wanted to avoid."

"i shall attire myself in the garments of a mortal--even those i assumed
on a former occasion," said fakrash, and as he spoke his outer robes
modernised into a frock-coat. "thus shall i escape attention."

"wait one moment," said horace. "what is that bulge in your
breast-pocket?"

"of a truth," said the jinnee, looking relieved but not a little foolish
as he extracted the object, "it is indeed the seal."

"you're in such a hurry to think the worst of everybody, you see!" said
horace. "now, _do_ try to carry away with you into your seclusion a
better opinion of human nature."

"perdition to all the people of this age!" cried fakrash, re-assuming
his green robe and turban, "for i now put no faith in human beings and
would afflict them all, were not the lord mayor (on whom be peace!)
mightier than i. therefore, while it is yet time, take thou the stopper,
and swear that, after i am in this bottle, thou wilt seal it as before
and cast it into deep waters, where no eye will look upon it more!"

"with all the pleasure in the world!" said horace; "only you must keep
_your_ part of the bargain first. you will kindly obliterate all
recollection of yourself and the brass bottle from the minds of every
human being who has had anything to do with you or it."

"not so," objected the jinnee, "for thus wouldst thou forget thy
compact."

"oh, very well, leave _me_ out, then," said horace. "not that anything
could make me forget _you_!"

fakrash swept his right hand round in a half circle. "it is
accomplished," he said. "all recollection of myself and yonder bottle is
now erased from the memories of every one but thyself."

"but how about my client?" said horace. "i can't afford to lose _him_,
you know."

"he shall return unto thee," said the jinnee, trembling with impatience.
"now perform thy share."

horace had triumphed. it had been a long and desperate duel with this
singular being, who was at once so crafty and so childlike, so credulous
and so suspicious, so benevolent and so malign. again and again he had
despaired of victory, but he had won at last. in another minute or so
this formidable jinnee would be safely bottled once more, and powerless
to intermeddle and plague him for the future.

and yet, in the very moment of triumph, quixotic as such scruples may
seem to some, ventimore's conscience smote him. he could not help a
certain pity for the old creature, who was shaking there convulsively
prepared to re-enter his bottle-prison rather than incur a wholly
imaginary doom. fakrash had aged visibly within the last hour; now he
looked even older than his three thousand and odd years. true, he had
led horace a fearful life of late, but at first, at least, his
intentions had been good. his gratitude, if mistaken in its form, was
the sign of a generous disposition. not every jinnee, surely, would
have endeavoured to press untold millions and honours and dignities of
all kinds upon him, in return for a service which most mortals would
have considered amply repaid by a brace of birds and an invitation to an
evening party.

and how was horace treating _him_? he was taking what, in his heart, he
felt to be a rather mean advantage of the jinnee's ignorance of modern
life to cajole him into returning to his captivity. why not suffer him
to live out the brief remainder of his years (for he could hardly last
more than another century or two at most) in freedom? fakrash had learnt
his lesson: he was not likely to interfere again in human affairs; he
might find his way back to the palace of the mountain of the clouds and
end his days there, in peaceful enjoyment of the society of such of the
jinn as might still survive unbottled.

so, obeying--against his own interests--some kindlier impulse, horace
made an effort to deter the jinnee, who was already hovering in air
above the neck of the bottle in a swirl of revolving draperies, like
some blundering old bee vainly endeavouring to hit the opening into his
hive.

"mr. fakrash," he cried, "before you go any farther, listen to me.
there's no real necessity, after all, for you to go back to your bottle.
if you'll only wait a little"

but the jinnee, who had now swelled to gigantic proportions, and whose
form and features were only dimly recognisable through the wreaths of
black vapour in which he was involved, answered him from his pillar of
smoke in a terrible voice. "wouldst thou still persuade me to linger?"
he cried. "hold thy peace and be ready to fulfil thine undertaking."

"but, look here," persisted horace. "i should feel such a brute if i
sealed you up without telling you" the whirling and roaring column,
in shape like an inverted cone, was being fast sucked down into the
vessel, till only a semi-materialised but highly infuriated head was
left above the neck of the bottle.

"must i tarry," it cried, "till the lord mayor arrive with his memlooks,
and the hour of safety is expired? by my head, if thou delayest another
instant, i will put no more faith in thee! and i will come forth once
more, and afflict thee and thy friends--ay, and all the dwellers in this
accursed city--with the most painful and unheard-of calamities."

and, with these words, the head sank into the bottle with a loud clap
resembling thunder.

horace hesitated no longer. the jinnee himself had absolved him from all
further scruples; to imperil sylvia and her parents--not to mention all
london--out of consideration for one obstinate and obnoxious old demon,
would clearly be carrying sentiment much too far.

accordingly, he made a rush for the jar and slipped the metal cover over
the mouth of the neck, which was so hot that it blistered his fingers,
and, seizing the poker, he hammered down the secret catch until the lid
fitted as closely as suleyman himself could have required.

then he stuffed the bottle into a kit-bag, adding a few coals to give it
extra weight, and toiled off with it to the nearest steamboat pier,
where he spent his remaining pence in purchasing a ticket to the temple.

*       *       *       *       *

next day the following paragraph appeared in one of the evening papers,
which probably had more space than usual at its disposal:

"singular occurrence on a penny
steamer

"a gentleman on board one of the thames steamboats (so we are informed
by an eye-witness) met with a somewhat ludicrous mishap yesterday
evening. it appears that he had with him a small portmanteau, or large
hand-bag, which he was supporting on the rail of the stern bulwark. just
as the vessel was opposite the savoy hotel he incautiously raised his
hand to the brim of his hat, thereby releasing hold of the bag, which
overbalanced itself and fell into the deepest part of the river, where
it instantly sank. the owner (whose carelessness occasioned considerable
amusement to passengers in his immediate vicinity) appeared no little
disconcerted by the oversight, and was not unnaturally reticent as to
the amount of his loss, though he was understood to state that the bag
contained nothing of any great value. however this may be, he has
probably learnt a lesson which will render him more careful in future."

the epilogue

on a certain evening in may horace ventimore dined in a private room at
the savoy, as one of the guests of mr. samuel wackerbath. in fact, he
might almost be said to be the guest of the evening, as the dinner was
given by way of celebrating the completion of the host's new country
house at lipsfield, of which horace was the architect, and also to
congratulate him on his approaching marriage (which was fixed to take
place early in the following month) with miss sylvia futvoye.

"quite a small and friendly party!" said mr. wackerbath, looking round
on his numerous sons and daughters, as he greeted horace in the
reception-room. "only ourselves, you see, miss futvoye, a young lady
with whom you are fairly well acquainted, and her people, and an old
schoolfellow of mine and his wife, who are not yet arrived. he's a man
of considerable eminence," he added, with a roll of reflected importance
in his voice; "quite worth your cultivating. sir lawrence pountney, his
name is. i don't know if you remember him, but he discharged the onerous
duties of lord mayor of london the year before last, and acquitted
himself very creditably--in fact, he got a baronetcy for it."

as the year before last was the year in which horace had paid his
involuntary visit to the guildhall, he was able to reply with truth that
he _did_ remember sir lawrence.

he was not altogether comfortable when the ex-lord-mayor was announced,
for it would have been more than awkward if sir lawrence had chanced to
remember _him_. fortunately, he gave no sign that he did so, though his
manner was graciousness itself. "delighted, my dear mr. ventimore," he
said pressing horace's hand almost as warmly as he had done that october
day of the dais, "most delighted to make your acquaintance! i am always
glad to meet a rising young man, and i hear that the house you have
designed for my old friend here is a perfect palace--a marvel, sir!"

"i knew he was my man," declared mr. wackerbath, as horace modestly
disclaimed sir lawrence's compliment. "you remember, pountney, my dear
fellow, that day when we were crossing westminster bridge together, and
i was telling you i thought of building? 'go to one of the leading
men--an r.a. and all that sort of thing,' you said, 'then you'll be sure
of getting your money's worth.' but i said, 'no, i like to choose for
myself; to--ah--exercise my own judgment in these matters. and there's a
young fellow i have in my eye who'll beat 'em all, if he's given the
chance. i'm off to see him now.' and off i went to great cloister street
(for he hadn't those palatial offices of his in victoria street at that
time) without losing another instant, and dropped in on him with my
little commission. didn't i, ventimore?"

"you did indeed," said horace, wondering how far these reminiscences
would go.

"and," continued mr. wackerbath, patting horace on the shoulder, "from
that day to this i've never had a moment's reason to regret it. we've
worked in perfect sympathy. his ideas coincided with mine. i think he
found that i met him, so to speak, on all fours."

ventimore assented, though it struck him that a happier expression
might, and would, have been employed if his client had remembered one
particular interview in which he had not figured to advantage.

they went in to dinner, in a room sumptuously decorated with panels of
grey-green brocade and softly shaded lamps, and screens of gilded
leather; through the centre of the table rose a tall palm, its boughs
hung with small electric globes like magic fruits.

"this palm," said the professor, who was in high good humour, "really
gives quite an oriental look to the table. personally, i think we might
reproduce the arabian style of decoration and arrangement generally in
our homes with great advantage. i often wonder it never occurred to my
future son-in-law there to turn his talents in that direction and design
an oriental interior for himself. nothing more comfortable and
luxurious--for a bachelor's purposes."

"i'm sure," said his wife, "horace managed to make himself quite
comfortable enough as it was. he has the most delightful rooms in
vincent square." ventimore heard her remark to sir lawrence: "i shall
never forget the first time we dined there, just after my daughter and
he were engaged. i was quite astonished: everything was so
perfect--quite simple, you know, but _so_ ingeniously arranged, and his
landlady such an excellent cook, too! still, of course, in many ways, it
will be nicer for him to have a home of his own."

"with such a beautiful and charming companion to share it with," said
sir lawrence, in his most florid manner, "the--ah--poorest home would
prove a paradise indeed! and i suppose now, my dear young lady," he
added, raising his voice to address sylvia, "you are busy making your
future abode as exquisite as taste and research can render it,
ransacking all the furniture shops in london for treasures, and going
about to auctions--or do you--ah--delegate that department to mr.
ventimore?"

"i do go about to old furniture shops, sir lawrence," she said, "but not
auctions. i'm afraid i should only get just the thing i didn't want if i
tried to bid.... and," she added, in a lower voice, turning to horace,
"i don't believe _you_ would be a bit more successful, horace!"

"what makes you say that, sylvia?" he asked, with a start.

"why, do you mean to say you've forgotten how you went to that auction
for papa, and came away without having managed to get a single thing?"
she said. "what a short memory you must have!"

there was only tender mockery in her eyes; absolutely no recollection of
the sinister purchase he had made at that sale, or how nearly it had
separated them for ever. so he hastened to admit that perhaps he had
_not_ been particularly successful at the auction in question.

sir lawrence next addressed him across the table. "i was just telling
mrs. futvoye," he said, "how much i regretted that i had not the
privilege of your acquaintance during my year of office. a lord mayor,
as you doubtless know, has exceptional facilities for exercising
hospitality, and it would have afforded me real pleasure if your first
visit to the guildhall could have been paid under my--hm--ha--auspices."

"you are very kind," said horace, very much on his guard; "i could not
wish to pay it under better."

"i flatter myself," said the ex-lord mayor, "that, while in office, i
did my humble best to maintain the traditions of the city, and i was
fortunate enough to have the honour of receiving more than the average
number of celebrities as guests. but i had one great disappointment, i
must tell you. it had always been a dream of mine that it might fall to
my lot to present some distinguished fellow-countryman with the freedom
of the city. by some curious chance, when the opportunity seemed about
to occur, the thing was put off and i missed it--missed it by the
nearest hair-breadth!"

"ah, well, sir lawrence," said ventimore, "one can't have _everything_!"

"for my part," put in lady pountney, who had only caught a word or two
of her husband's remarks, "what _i_ miss most is having the sentinels
present arms whenever i went out for a drive. they did it so nicely and
respectfully. i confess i enjoyed that. my husband never cared much for
it. indeed, he wouldn't even use the state coach unless he was
absolutely obliged. he was as obstinate as a mule about it!"

"i see, lady pountney," the professor put in, "that you share the common
prejudice against mules. it's quite a mistaken one. the mule has never
been properly appreciated in this country. he is really the gentlest and
most docile of creatures!"

"i can't say i like them myself," said lady pountney; "such a mongrel
sort of animal--neither one thing nor the other!"

"and they're hideous too, anthony," added his wife. "and not at all
clever!"

"there you're mistaken, my dear," said the professor; "they are capable
of almost human intelligence. i have had considerable personal
experience of what a mule can do," he informed lady pountney, who seemed
still incredulous. "more than most people indeed, and i can assure you,
my dear lady pountney, that they readily adapt themselves to almost any
environment, and will endure the greatest hardships without exhibiting
any signs of distress. i see by your expression, ventimore, that you
don't agree with me, eh?"

horace had to set his teeth hard for a moment, lest he should disgrace
himself by a peal of untimely mirth--but by a strong effort of will he
managed to command his muscles.

"well, sir," he said, "i've only chanced to come into close contact with
one mule in my life, and, frankly, i've no desire to repeat the
experience."

"you happened to come upon an unfavourable specimen, that's all," said
the professor. "there are exceptions to every rule."

"this animal," horace said, "was certainly exceptional enough in every
way."

"do tell us all about it," pleaded one of the miss wackerbaths, and all
the ladies joined in the entreaty until horace found himself under the
necessity of improvising a story, which, it must be confessed, fell
exceedingly flat.

this final ordeal past, he grew silent and thoughtful, as he sat there
by sylvia's side, looking out through the glazed gallery outside upon
the spring foliage along the embankment, the opaline river, and the shot
towers and buildings on the opposite bank glowing warm brown against an
evening sky of silvery blue.

not for the first time did it seem strange, incredible almost, to him
that all these people should be so utterly without any recollection of
events which surely might have been expected to leave some trace upon
the least retentive memory--and yet it only proved once more how
thoroughly and honourably the old jinnee, now slumbering placidly in his
bottle deep down in unfathomable mud, opposite the very spot where they
were dining, had fulfilled his last undertaking.

fakrash, the brass bottle, and all the fantastic and embarrassing
performances were indeed as totally forgotten as though they had never
been.

*       *       *       *       *

and it is but too probable that even this modest and veracious account
of them will prove to have been included in the general act of
oblivion--though the author will trust as long as possible that
fakrash-el-aamash may have neglected to provide for this particular
case, and that the history of the brass bottle may thus be permitted to
linger awhile in the memories of some at least of its readers.

distributed proofreading team at http://www.pgdp.net (this
file was produced from images generously made available
by the internet archive/canadian libraries)


transcriber's note: the author was inconsistent in the
use of single quotes in contracted words. all have
been retained as in the original.


the tinted venus
a farcical romance

by

f. anstey

author of
"the giant's robe," "vice versâ," etc.

illustrated by bernard partridge

new york and london
harper and brothers
1898

"to you,
free and ingenious spirits, he doth now
in me, present his service, with his vow
he hath done his best; and, though he cannot glory
in his invention (this work being a story
of reverend antiquity), he doth hope
in the proportion of it, and the scope,
you may observe some pieces drawn like one
of a steadfast hand; and with the whiter stone
to be marked in your fair censures. more than this
i am forbid to promise."

massinger.

contents.

page

i. in pursuit of pleasure                                         3

ii. pleasure in pursuit                                           27

iii. a distinguished stranger                                      43

iv. from bad to worse                                             55

v. an experiment                                                 77

vi. two are company                                               93

vii. a further predicament                                        109

viii. between the devil and the deep sea                           127

ix. at last!                                                     151

x. damocles dines out                                           169

xi. denounced                                                    189

xii. an appeal                                                    207

xiii. the last straw                                               227

xiv. the thirteenth trump                                         241

xv. the odd trick                                                263

list of illustrations.

page

"there," he said triumphantly, "it might have
been made for her!"                                                 25

"answer me," he said roughly; "is this some lark
of yours?"                                                          32

"did you want to see me on--on business, mum?"                      47

"what would be done to him?" asked the hairdresser,
with a quite unpleasant internal
sensation                                                           67

"keep off! tell her to drop it, tweddle!"                           86

"it is a miserable thing," he was thinking, "for
a man ... to have a female statue trotting
after him like a great dorg"                                       104

she was standing before the low chimney-glass,
regarding herself intently                                         119

"for 'arf a pint i'd knock your bloomin' 'ed in!"                  140

"why did you not kneel to me before?"                              161

she struck a nameless fear into leander's soul                     177

her hands were unsteady with passion as she tied
her bonnet-strings                                                 199

leander went down on all fours on the hearth-rug                   220

"stop where you are!... for mercy's sake, don't come in!"          238

"leander!" she cried, ... "i don't believe she
can do it!"                                                        255

he threw himself down by her chair, and drew
down the hands in which she had hidden her
face                                                               276

in pursuit of pleasure

i.

"ther hopped hawkyn,
ther daunsed dawkyn,
ther trumped tomkyn...."

_the tournament of tottenham._

in southampton row, bloomsbury, there is a small alley or passage
leading into queen square, and rendered inaccessible to all but foot
passengers by some iron posts. the shops in this passage are of a
subdued exterior, and are overshadowed by a dingy old edifice dedicated
to st. george the martyr, which seems to have begun its existence as a
rather handsome chapel, and to have improved itself, by a sort of
evolution, into a singularly ugly church.

into this alley, one saturday afternoon late in october, came a short
stout young man, with sandy hair, and a perpetual grin denoting
anticipation rather than enjoyment. opposite the church he stopped at a
hairdresser's shop, which bore the name of tweddle. the display in the
window was chastely severe; the conventional half-lady revolving slowly
in fatuous self-satisfaction, and the gentleman bearing a piebald beard
with waxen resignation, were not to be found in this shop-front, which
exhibited nothing but a small pile of toilet remedies and a few lengths
of hair of graduated tints. it was doubtful, perhaps, whether such
self-restraint on the part of its proprietor was the result of a
distaste for empty show, or a conviction that the neighbourhood did not
expect it.

inside the shop there was nobody but a small boy, corking and labelling
bottles; but before he could answer any question as to the whereabouts
of his employer, that artist made his appearance. leander tweddle was
about thirty, of middle height, with a luxuriant head of brown hair, and
carefully-trimmed whiskers that curled round towards his upper lip,
where they spent themselves in a faint moustache. his eyes were rather
small, and his nose had a decided upward tendency; but, with his
pink-and-white complexion and compact well-made figure, he was far from
ill-looking, though he thought himself even farther.

"well, jauncy," he said, after the first greetings, "so you haven't
forgot our appointment?"

"why, no," explained his friend; "but i never thought i should get away
in time to keep it. we've been in court all the morning with motions and
short causes, and the old vice sat on till past three; and when we did
get back to chambers, splitter kep' me there discussing an opinion of
his i couldn't agree with, and i was ever so long before i got him to
alter it my way."

for he was clerk to a barrister in good practice, and it was jauncy's
pride to discover an occasional verbal slip in some of his employer's
more hastily written opinions on cases, and suggest improvements.

"well, james," said the hairdresser, "i don't know that i could have got
away myself any earlier. i've been so absorbed in the laborrit'ry, what
with three rejuvenators and an elixir all on the simmer together, i
almost gave way under the strain of it; but they're set to cool now, and
i'm ready to go as soon as you please."

"now," said jauncy, briskly, as they left the shop together, "if we're
to get up to rosherwich gardens to-night, we mustn't dawdle."

"i just want to look in here a minute," said tweddle, stopping before
the window of a working-jeweller, who sat there in a narrow partition
facing the light, with a great horn lens protruding from one of his eyes
like a monstrous growth. "i left something there to be altered, and i
may as well see if it's done."

apparently it was done, for he came out almost immediately, thrusting a
small cardboard box into his pocket as he rejoined his friend. "now we'd
better take a cab up to fenchurch street," said jauncy. "can't keep
those girls standing about on the platform."

as they drove along, tweddle observed, "i didn't understand that our
party was to include the fair sect, james?"

"didn't you? i thought my letter said so plain enough. i'm an engaged
man now, you know, tweddle. it wouldn't do if i went out to enjoy myself
and left my young lady at home!"

"no," agreed leander tweddle, with a moral twinge, "no, james. i'd
forgot you were engaged. what's the lady's name, by-the-by?"

"parkinson; bella parkinson," was the answer.

leander had turned a deeper colour. "did you say," he asked, looking out
of the window on his side of the hansom, "that there was another lady
going down?"

"only bella's sister, ada. she's a regular jolly girl, ada is,
you'llhullo!"

for tweddle had suddenly thrust his stick up the trap and stopped the
cab. "i'm very sorry, james," he said, preparing to get out, "but--but
you'll have to excuse me being of your company."

"do you mean that my bella and her sister are not good enough company
for you?" demanded jauncy. "you were a shop-assistant yourself, tweddle,
only a short while ago!"

"i know that, james, i know; and it isn't that--far from it. i'm sure
they are two as respectable girls, and quite the ladies in every
respect, as i'd wish to meet. only the fact is"

the driver was listening through the trap, and before leander would say
more he told him to drive on till further orders, after which he
continued--

"the fact is--we haven't met for so long that i dare say you're unaware
of it--but _i'm_ engaged, james, too!"

"wish you joy with all my heart, tweddle; but what then?"

"why," exclaimed leander, "my matilda (that's _her_ name) is the dearest
girl, james; but she's most uncommon partickler, and i don't think she'd
like my going to a place of open-air entertainment where there's
dancing--and i'll get out here, please!"

"gammon!" said jauncy. "that isn't it, tweddle; don't try and humbug me.
you were ready enough to go just now. you've a better reason than that!"

"james, i'll tell you the truth; i have. in earlier days, james, i used
constantly to be meeting miss parkinson and her sister in serciety, and
i dare say i made myself so pleasant and agreeable (you know what a way
that is of mine), that miss ada (not _your_ lady, of course) may have
thought i meant something special by it, and there's no saying but what
it might have come in time to our keeping company, only i happened just
then to see matilda, and--and i haven't been near the parkinsons ever
since. so you can see for yourself that a meeting might be awkward for
all parties concerned; and i really must get out, james!"

jauncy forced him back. "it's all nonsense, tweddle," he said, "you
can't back out of it now! don't make a fuss about nothing. ada don't
look as if she'd been breaking her heart for you!"

"you never can tell with women," said the hairdresser, sententiously;
"and meeting me sudden, and learning it could never be--no one can say
how she mightn't take it!"

"i call it too bad!" exclaimed jauncy. "here have i been counting on you
to make the ladies enjoy themselves--for i haven't your gift of
entertaining conversation, and don't pretend to it--and you go and leave
me in the lurch, and spoil their evening for them!"

"if i thought i was doing that" said leander, hesitating.

"you are, you know you are!" persisted jauncy, who was naturally anxious
to avoid the reduction of his party to so inconvenient a number as
three.

"and see here, tweddle, you needn't say anything of your engagement
unless you like. i give you my word i won't, not even to bella, if
you'll only come! as to ada, she can take care of herself, unless i'm
very much mistaken in her. so come along, like a good chap!"

"i give in, james; i give in," said leander. "a promise is a promise,
and yet i feel somehow i'm doing wrong to go, and as if no good would
come of it. i do indeed!"

and so he did not stop the cab a second time, and allowed himself to be
taken without further protest to fenchurch street station, on the
platform of which they found the misses parkinson waiting for them.

miss bella parkinson, the elder of the two, who was employed in a large
toy and fancy goods establishment in the neighbourhood of westbourne
grove, was tall and slim, with pale eyes and auburn hair. she had some
claims to good looks, in spite of a slightly pasty complexion, and a
large and decidedly unamiable mouth.

her sister ada was the more pleasing in appearance and manner, a
brunette with large brown eyes, an impertinent little nose, and a
brilliant healthy colour. she was an assistant to a milliner and
bonnet-maker in the edgware road.

both these young ladies, when in the fulfilment of their daily duties,
were models of deportment; in their hours of ease, the elder's cold
dignity was rather apt to turn to peevishness, while the younger sister,
relieved from the restraints of the showroom, betrayed a lively and even
frivolous disposition.

it was this liveliness and frivolity that had fascinated the hairdresser
in days that had gone by; but if he had felt any self-distrust now in
venturing within their influence, such apprehensions vanished with the
first sight of the charms which had been counteracted before they had
time to prevail.

she was well enough, this miss ada parkinson, he thought now; a
nice-looking girl in her way, and stylishly dressed. but his matilda
looked twice the lady she ever could, and a vision of his betrothed (at
that time taking a week's rest in the country) rose before him, as if to
justify and confirm his preference.

the luckless james had to undergo some amount of scolding from miss
bella for his want of punctuality, a scolding which merely supplied an
object to his grin; and during her remarks, ada had ample time to rally
leander tweddle upon his long neglect, and used it to the best
advantage.

perhaps he would have been better pleased by a little less
insensibility, a touch of surprise and pleasure on her part at meeting
him again, as he allowed himself to show in a remark that his absence
did not seem to have affected her to any great extent.

"i don't know what you expected, mr. tweddle," she replied. "ought i to
have cried both my eyes out? you haven't cried out either of yours, you
know!"

"'men must work, and women must weep,' as shakspeare says," he observed,
with a vague idea that he was making rather an apt quotation. but his
companion pointed out that this only applied to cases where the women
had something to weep about.

the party had a compartment to themselves, and leander, who sat at one
end opposite to ada, found his spirits rising under the influence of her
lively sallies.

"that's the only thing matilda wants," he thought, "a little more
liveliness and go about her. i like a little chaff myself, now and then,
i must say."

at the other end of the carriage, bella had been suggesting that the
gardens might be closed so late in the year, and regretting that they
had not chosen the new melodrama at the adelphi instead; which caused
jauncy to draw glowing pictures of the attractions of rosherwich
gardens.

"i was there a year ago last summer," he said, "and it was first-rate:
open-air dancing, summer theatre, rope-walking, fireworks, and supper
out under the trees. you'll enjoy yourself, bella, right enough when you
get there!"

"if that isn't enough for you, bella," cried her sister, "you must be
difficult to please! i'm sure i'm quite looking forward to it; aren't
you, mr. tweddle?"

the poor man was cursed by the fatal desire of pleasing, and
unconsciously threw an altogether unnecessary degree of _empressement_
into his voice as he replied, "in the company i am at present, i should
look forward to it, if it was a wilderness with a funeral in it."

"oh dear me, mr. tweddle, that _is_ a pretty speech!" said ada, and she
blushed in a manner which appalled the conscience-stricken hairdresser.

"there i go again," he thought remorsefully, "putting things in the poor
girl's head--it ain't right. i'm making myself too pleasant!"

and then it struck him that it would be only prudent to make his
position clearly understood, and, carefully lowering his voice, he began
a speech with that excellent intention. "miss parkinson," he said
huskily, "there's something i have to tell you about myself, very
particular. since i last enjoyed the pleasure of meeting with you my
prospects have greatly altered, i am no longer"

but she cut him short with a little gesture of entreaty. "oh, not here,
please, mr. tweddle," she said; "tell me about it in the gardens!"

"very well," he said, relieved; "remind me when we get there--in case i
forget, you know."

"remind you!" cried ada; "the _idea_, mr. tweddle! i certainly shan't do
any such thing."

"she thinks i am going to propose to her!" he thought ruefully; "it will
be a delicate business undeceiving her. i wish it was over and done
with!"

it was quite dark by the time they had crossed the river by the ferry,
and made their way up to the entrance to the pleasure gardens, imposing
enough, with its white colonnade, its sphinxes, and lines of coloured
lamps.

but no one else had crossed with them; and, as they stood at the
turnstiles, all they could see of the grounds beyond seemed so dark and
silent that they began to have involuntary misgivings. "i suppose,"
said jauncy to the man at the ticket-hole, "the gardens are open--eh?"

"oh yes," he said gruffly, "_they're_ open--they're _open_; though there
ain't much going on out-of-doors, being the last night of the season."

bella again wished that they had selected the adelphi for their
evening's pleasure, and remarked that jauncy "might have known."

"well," said the latter to the party generally, "what do you say--shall
we go in, or get back by the first train home?"

"don't be so ridiculous, james!" said bella, peevishly. "what's the good
of going back, to be too late for everything. the mischief's done now."

"oh, let's go in!" advised ada; "the amusements and things will be just
as nice indoors--nicer on a chilly evening like this;" and leander
seconded her heartily.

so they went in; jauncy leading the way with the still complaining
bella, and leander tweddle bringing up the rear with ada. they picked
their way as well as they could in the darkness, caused by the closely
planted trees and shrubs, down a winding path, where the sopped leaves
gave a slippery foothold, and the branches flicked moisture insultingly
in their faces as they pushed them aside.

a dead silence reigned everywhere, broken only by the wind as it rustled
amongst the bare twigs, or the whistling of a flaring gas-torch
protruding from some convenient tree.

jauncy occasionally shouted back some desperate essay at jocularity, at
which ada laughed with some perseverance, until even she could no longer
resist the influence of the surroundings.

on a hot summer's evening those grounds, brilliantly illuminated and
crowded by holiday-makers, have been the delight of thousands of honest
londoners, and will be so again; but it was undeniable that on this
particular occasion they were pervaded by a decent melancholy.

ada had slipped a hand, clad in crimson silk, through leander's arm as
they groped through the gloom together, and shrank to his side now and
then in an alarm which was only half pretended. but if her light
pressure upon his arm made his heart beat at all the faster, it was only
at the fancy that the trusting hand was his matilda's, or so at least
did he account for it to himself afterwards.

they followed on, down a broad promenade, where the ground glistened
with autumn damps, and the unlighted lamps looked wan and spectral.
there was a bear-pit hard by, over the railings of which ada leaned and
shouted a defiant "boo;" but the bears had turned in for the night, and
the stone re-echoed her voice with a hollow ring. indistinct bird forms
were roosting in cages; but her umbrella had no effect upon them.

jauncy was waiting for them to come up, perhaps as a protection against
his _fiancée's_ reproaches. "in another hour," he said, with an implied
apology, "you'll see how different this place looks. we--we're come a
little too early. suppose we fill up the time by a nice little dinner at
the restorong--eh, ada? what do you think, tweddle?"

the suggestion was received favourably, and jauncy, thankful to retrieve
his reputation as leader, took them towards the spot where food was to
be had.

presently they saw lights twinkling through the trees, and came to a
place which was clearly the focus of festivity. there was the open-air
theatre, its drop-scene lowered, its proscenium lost in the gloom;
there was the circle for _al-fresco_ dancing, but it was bare, and the
clustered lights were dead; there was the restaurant, dark and silent
like all else.

jauncy stood there and rubbed his chin. "this is where i dined when we
were here last," he said, at length; "and a capital little dinner they
gave us too!"

"what _i_ should like to know," said the elder miss parkinson, "is,
where are we to dine to-night?"

"yes," said jauncy, encouragingly; "don't you fret yourself, bella.
here's an old party sweeping up leaves, we'll ask him."

they did so, and were referred to a large building, in the gothic style,
with a tudor doorway, known as the "baronial all," where lights shone
behind the painted windows.

inside, a few of the lamps around the pillars were lighted, and the body
of the floor was roped in as if for dancing; but the hall was empty,
save for a barmaid, assisted by a sharp little girl, behind the long bar
on one of its sides.

jauncy led his dejected little party up to this, and again put his
inquiry with less hopefulness. when he found that the only available
form of refreshment that evening was bitter ale and captain's biscuits,
mitigated by occasional caraway seeds, he became a truly pitiable
object.

"they--they don't keep this place up on the same scale in the autumn,
you see," he explained weakly. "it's very different in summer; what they
call 'an endless round of amusements.'"

"there's an endless round of amusement now," observed ada; "but it's a
naught!"

"oh, there'll be something going on by-and-by, never fear," said jauncy,
determined to be sanguine; "or else they wouldn't be open."

"there'll be dancing here this evening," the barmaid informed him. "that
is all we open for at this time of year; and this is the last night of
the season."

"oh!" said jauncy, cheerfully; "you see we only came just in time,
bella; and i suppose you'll have a good many down here to-night--eh,
miss?"

"how much did we take last saturday, jenny?" said the barmaid to the
sharp little girl.

"seven and fourpence 'ap'ny--most of it beer," said the child.
"margaret, i may count the money again to-night, mayn't i?"

the barmaid made some mental calculation, after which she replied to
jauncy's question. "we may have some fifteen couples or so down
to-night," she said; "but that won't be for half an hour yet."

"the question is," said jauncy, trying to bear up under this last blow;
"the question is, how are we to amuse ourselves till the dancing
begins?"

"i don't know what others are going to do," bella announced; "but i
shall stay here, james, and keep warm--if i can!" and once more she
uttered her regret that they had not gone to the adelphi.

her sister declined to follow her example. "i mean to see all there is
to be seen," she declared, "since we are here; and perhaps mr. tweddle
will come and take care of me. will you, mr. tweddle?"

he was not sorry to comply, and they wandered out together through the
grounds, which offered considerable variety. there were alleys lined
with pale plaster statues, and a grove dedicated to the master minds of
the world, represented by huge busts, with more or less appropriate
quotations. there were alcoves, too, and neatly ruined castles.

ada talked almost the whole time in a sprightly manner, which gave
leander no opportunity of introducing the subject of his engagement, and
this continued until they had reached a small battlemented platform on
some rising ground; below were the black masses of trees, with a faint
fringe of light here and there; beyond lay the thames, in which red and
white reflections quivered, and from whose distant bends and reaches
came the dull roar of fog-horns and the pantings of tugs.

ada stood here in silence for some time; at last she said, "after all,
i'm not sorry we came--are _you_?"

"if i don't take care what i say, i _may_ be!" he thought, and answered
guardedly, "on the contrary, i'm glad, for it gives me the opportunity
of telling you something i--i think you ought to know."

"what was he going to say next?" she thought. was a declaration coming,
and if so, should she accept him? she was not sure; he had behaved very
badly in keeping so long away from her, and a proposal would be a very
suitable form of apology; but there was the gentleman who travelled for
a certain firm in the edgware road, he had been very "particular" in his
attentions of late. well, she would see how she felt when leander had
spoken; he was beginning to speak now.

"i don't want to put it too abrupt," he said; "i'll come to it
gradually. there's a young lady that i'm now looking forward to spending
the whole of my future life with."

"and what is she called?" asked ada. ("he's rather a nice little man,
after all!" she was thinking.)

"matilda," he said; and the answer came like a blow in the face. for the
moment she hated him as bitterly as if he had been all the world to
her; but she carried off her mortification by a rather hysterical laugh.

"fancy you being engaged!" she said, by way of explanation of her
merriment; "and to any one with the name of matilda--it's such a stupid
sounding sort of name!"

"it ain't at all; it all depends how you say it. if you pronounce it
like i do, _matilda_, it has rather a pretty sound. you try now."

"well, we won't quarrel about it, mr. tweddle; i'm glad it isn't my
name, that's all. and now tell me all about your young lady. what's her
other name, and is she very good-looking?"

"she's a miss matilda collum," said he; "she is considered handsome by
competent judges, and she keeps the books at a florist's in the vicinity
of bayswater."

"and, if it isn't a rude question, why didn't you bring her with you
this evening?"

"because she's away for a short holiday, and isn't coming back till the
last thing to-morrow night."

"and i suppose you've been wishing i was matilda all the time?" she said
audaciously; for miss ada parkinson was not an over-scrupulous young
person, and did not recognize in the fact of her friend's engagement any
reason why she should not attempt to reclaim his vagrant admiration.

leander _had_ been guilty of this wish once or twice; but though he was
not absolutely overflowing with tact, he did refrain from admitting the
impeachment.

"well, you see," he said, in not very happy evasion, "matilda doesn't
care about this kind of thing; she's rather particular, matilda is."

"and i'm not!" said ada. "i see; thank you, mr. tweddle!"

"you do take one up so!" he complained. "i never intended nothing of the
sort--far from it."

"well, then, i forgive you; we can't all be matildas, i suppose. and
now, suppose we go back; they will be beginning to dance by now!"

"with pleasure," he said; "only you must excuse me dancing, because, as
an engaged man, i have had to renounce (except with one person) the
charms of terpsy-chore. i mean," he explained condescendingly, "that i
can't dance in public save with my intended."

"ah, well," said ada, "perhaps terpsy-chore will get over it; still i
should like to see the terpsy-choring, if you have no objection."

and they returned to the baronial hall, which by this time presented a
more cheerful appearance. the lamps round the mirror-lined pillars were
all lit, and the musicians were just striking up the opening bars of the
lancers; upon which several gentlemen amongst the assembly, which now
numbered about forty, ran out into the open and took up positions, like
colour-sergeants at drill, to be presently joined, in some bashfulness,
by such ladies as desired partners.

the lancers were performed with extreme conscientiousness; and when it
was over, every gentleman with any _savoir faire_ to speak of presented
his partner with a glass of beer.

then came a waltz, to which ada beat time impatiently with her foot, and
bit her lip, as she had to look on by leander's side.

"there's bella and james going round," she said; "i've never had to sit
out a waltz before!"

he felt the implied reproach, and thought whether there could be any
harm, after all, in taking a turn or two; it would be only polite. but,
before he could recant in words, a soldier came up, a medium-sized
warrior with a large nose and round little eyes, who had been very funny
during the lancers in directing all the figures by words of military
command.

"will you allow me the honour, miss, of just one round?" he said to ada,
respectfully enough.

the etiquette of this ballroom was not of the strictest; but she would
not have consented but for the desire of showing leander that she was
not dependent upon him for her amusement. as it was, she accepted the
corporal's arm a little defiantly.

leander watched them round the hall with an odd sensation, almost of
jealousy--it was quite ridiculous, because he could have danced with ada
himself had he cared to do so; and besides, it was not she, but matilda,
whom he adored.

but, as he began to notice, ada was looking remarkably pretty that
evening, and really was a partner who would bring any one credit; and
her corporal danced villainously, revolving with stiff and wooden jerks,
like a toy soldier. now leander flattered himself he could waltz--having
had considerable practice in bygone days in a select assembly, where the
tickets were two shillings each, and the gentlemen, as the notices said
ambiguously enough, "were restricted to wearing gloves."

so he felt indignantly that ada was not having justice done to her.
"i've a good mind to give her a turn," he thought, "and show them all
what waltzing is!"

just then the pair happened to come to a halt close to him. "shockin'
time they're playing this waltz in," he heard the soldier exclaim with
humorous vivacity (he was apparently the funny man of the regiment, and
had brought a silent but appreciative comrade with him as audience),
"abominable! excruciatin'! comic!! 'orrible!!!"

leander seized the opportunity. "excuse me," he said politely, "but if
you don't like the music, perhaps you wouldn't mind giving up this young
lady to me?"

"oh come, i say!" said the man of war, running his fingers through his
short curly hair; "my good feller, you'd better see what the lady says
to that!" (he evidently had no doubt himself.)

"i'm very well content as i am, thank you all the same, mr. tweddle,"
said ada, unkindly adding in a lower tone, "if you're so anxious to
dance, dance with terpsy-chore!"

and again he was left to watch the whirling couples with melancholy
eyes. the corporal's brother-in-arms was wheeling round with a plain
young person, apparently in domestic service, whose face was overspread
by a large red smile of satiated ambition. james and bella flitted by,
dancing vigorously, and bella's discontent seemed to have vanished for
the time. there were jigging couples and prancing couples; couples that
bounced round like imprisoned bees, and couples that glided past in calm
and conscious superiority. he alone stood apart, excluded from the happy
throng, and he began to have a pathetic sense of injury.

but the music stopped at last, and ada, dismissing her partner, came
towards him. "you don't seem to be enjoying yourself, mr. tweddle," she
said maliciously.

"don't i?" he replied. "well, so long as you are, it don't matter, miss
parkinson--it don't matter."

"but i'm not--at least, i didn't that dance," she said. "that soldier
man did talk such rubbish, and he trod on my feet twice. i'm so hot! i
wonder if it's cooler outside?"

"will you come and see?" he suggested, and this time she did not disdain
his arm, and they strolled out together.

following a path they had hitherto left unexplored, they came to a
little enclosure surrounded by tall shrubs; in the centre, upon a low
pedestal, stood a female statue, upon which a gas lamp, some paces off,
cast a flickering gleam athwart the foliage.

the exceptional grace and beauty of the figure would have been apparent
to any lover of art. she stood there, her right arm raised, partly in
gracious invitation, partly in queenly command, her left hand extended,
palm downwards, as if to be reverentially saluted. the hair was parted
in boldly indicated waves over the broad low brow, and confined by a
fillet in a large loose knot at the back. she was clad in a long chiton,
which lapped in soft zig-zag folds over the girdle and fell to the feet
in straight parallel lines, and a chlamys hanging from her shoulders
concealed the left arm to the elbow, while it left the right arm free.

in the uncertain light one could easily fancy soft eyes swimming in
those wide blank sockets, and the ripe lips were curved by a dreamy
smile, at once tender and disdainful.

leander tweddle and miss ada parkinson, however, stood before the statue
in an unmoved, not to say critical, mood.

"who's she supposed to be, i wonder?" asked the young lady, rather as if
the sculptor were a harmless lunatic whose delusions took a marble shape
occasionally. this, by the way, is a question which may frequently be
heard in picture galleries, and implies an enlightened tolerance.

"i don't know," said leander; "a foreign female, i fancy--that's
russian on the pedestal." he inferred this from a resemblance to the
characters on certain packets of cigarettes.

"but there's some english underneath," said ada; "i can just make it
out. ap--apro--aprodyte. what a funny name!"

"you haven't prenounced it quite correckly," he said; "out there they
sound the ph like a f, and give all the syllables--afroddity." he felt a
kind of intuition that this was nearer the correct rendering.

"well," observed ada, "she's got a silly look, don't you think?"

leander was less narrow, and gave it as his opinion that she had been
"done from a fine woman."

ada remarked that she herself would never consent to be taken in so
unbecoming a costume. "one might as well have no figure at all in things
hanging down for all the world like a sack," she said.

proceeding to details, she was struck by the smallness of the hands; and
it must be admitted that, although the statue as a whole was slightly
above the average female height, the arms from the elbow downwards, and
particularly the hands, were by no means in proportion, and almost
justified miss parkinson's objection, that "no woman could have hands so
small as that."

"i know some one who has--quite as small," said he softly.

ada instantly drew off one of the crimson gloves and held out her hand
beside the statue's. it was a well-shaped hand, as she very well knew,
but it was decidedly larger than the one with which she compared it. "i
_said_ so," she observed; "now are you satisfied, mr. tweddle?"

but he had been thinking of a hand more slender and dainty than hers,
and allowed himself to admit as much. "i--i wasn't meaning you at all,"
he said bluntly.

she laughed a little jarring laugh. "oh, matilda, of course! nobody is
like matilda now! but come, mr. tweddle, you're not going to stand there
and tell me that this wonderful matilda of yours has hands no bigger
than those?"

"she has been endowed with quite remarkable small hands," said he; "you
wouldn't believe it without seeing. it so happens," he added suddenly,
"that i can give you a very fair ideer of the size they are, for i've
got a ring of hers in my pocket at this moment. it came about this way:
my aunt (the same that used to let her second floor to james, and that
matilda lodges with at present), my aunt, as soon as she heard of our
being engaged, nothing would do but i must give matilda an old ring with
a posy inside it, that was in our family, and we soon found the ring was
too large to keep on, and i left it with old vidler, near my place of
business, to be made tighter, and called for it on my way here this very
afternoon, and fortunately enough it was ready."

he took out the ring from its bed of pink cotton wool, and offered it to
miss parkinson.

"you see if you can get it on," he said; "try the little finger!"

she drew back, offended. "_i_ don't want to try it, thank you," she said
(she felt as if she might fling it into the bushes if she allowed
herself to touch it). "if you _must_ try it on somebody, there's the
statue! you'll find no difficulty in getting it on any of her
fingers--or thumbs," she added.

"you shall see," said leander. "my belief is, it's too small for her, if
anything."

he was a true lover; anxious to vindicate his lady's perfections before
all the world, and perhaps to convince himself that his estimate was not
exaggerated. the proof was so easy, the statue's left hand hung
temptingly within his reach; he accepted the challenge, and slipped the
ring up the third finger, that was slightly raised as if to receive it.
the hand struck no chill, so moist and mild was the evening, but felt
warm and almost soft in his grasp.

"there," he said triumphantly, "it might have been made for her!"

"well," said ada, not too consistently, "i never said it mightn't!"

"excuse me," said he, "but you said it would be too large for her; and,
if you'll believe me, it's as much as i can do to get it off her finger,
it fits that close."

"well, make haste and get it off, mr. tweddle, do," said ada,
impatiently. "i've stayed out quite long enough."

"in one moment," he replied; "it's quite a job, i declare, quite a job!"

"oh, you men are so clumsy!" cried ada. "let _me_ try."

"no, no!" he said, rather irritably; "i can manage it," and he continued
to fumble.

at last he looked over his shoulder and said, "it's a singler
succumstance, but i can't get the ring past the bend of the finger."

ada was cruel enough to burst out laughing. "it's a judgment upon you,
mr. tweddle!" she cried.

"you dared me to it!" he retorted. "it isn't friendly of you, i must
say, miss parkinson, to set there enjoying of it--it's bad taste!"

"well, then, i'm very sorry, mr. tweddle; i won't laugh any more; but,
for goodness' sake, take me back to the hall now."

"it's coming!" he said; "i'm working it over the joint now--it's coming
quite easily."

"but i can't wait here while it comes," she said. "do you want me to go
back alone? you're not very polite to me this evening, i must say."

"what am i to do?" he said distractedly. "this ring is my engagement
ring; it's valuable. i can't go away without it!"

"the statue won't run away--you can come back again, by-and-by. you
don't expect me to spend the rest of the evening out here? i never
thought you could be rude to a lady, mr. tweddle."

"no more i can," he said. "your wishes, miss ada, are equivocal to
commands; allow me the honour of reconducting you to the baronial hall."

he offered his arm in his best manner; she took it, and together they
passed out of the enclosure, leaving the statue in undisturbed
possession of the ring.

pleasure in pursuit

ii.

"and you, great sculptor, so you gave
a score of years to art, her slave,
and that's your venus, whence we turn
to yonder girl"

another waltz had just begun as they re-entered the baronial hall, and
ada glanced up at her companion from her daring brown eyes. "what would
you say if i told you you might have this dance with me?" she inquired.

the hairdresser hesitated for just one moment. he had meant to leave her
there and go back for his ring; but the waltz they were playing was a
very enticing one. ada was looking uncommonly pretty just then; he could
get the ring equally well a few minutes later.

"i should take it very kind of you," he said, gratefully, at length.

"ask for it, then," said ada; and he did ask for it.

he forgot matilda and his engagement for the moment; he sacrificed all
his scruples about dancing in public; but he somehow failed to enjoy
this pleasure, illicit though it was.

for one thing, he could not long keep matilda out of his thoughts. he
was doing nothing positively wrong; still, it was undeniable that she
would not approve of his being there at all, still less if she knew
that the gold ring given to him by his aunt for the purposes of his
betrothal had been left on the finger of a foreign statue, and exposed
to the mercy of any passer-by, while he waltzed with a bonnet-maker's
assistant.

and his conscience was awakened still further by the discovery that ada
was a somewhat disappointing partner. "she's not so light as she used to
be," he thought, "and then she jumps. i'd forgotten she jumped."

before the waltz was nearly over he led her back to a chair, alleging as
his excuse that he was afraid to abandon his ring any longer, and
hastened away to the spot where it was to be found.

he went along the same path, and soon came to an enclosure; but no
sooner had he entered it than he saw that he must have mistaken his way;
this was not the right place. there was no statue in the middle.

he was about to turn away, when he saw something that made him start; it
was a low pedestal in the centre, with the same characters upon it that
he had read with ada. it was the place, after all; yes, he could not be
mistaken; he knew it now.

where was the statue which had so lately occupied that pedestal? had it
fallen over amongst the bushes? he felt about for it in vain. it must
have been removed for some purpose while he had been dancing; but by
whom, and why?

the best way to find out would be to ask some one in authority. the
manager was in the baronial hall, officiating as m.c.; he would go and
inquire whether the removal had been by his orders.

he was fortunate enough to catch him as he was coming out of the hall,
and he seized him by the arm with nervous haste. "mister," he began,
"if you've found one of your plaster figures with a gold ring on, it's
mine. i--i put it on in a joking kind of way, and i had to leave it for
awhile; and now, when i come back for it, it's gone!"

"i'm sorry to hear it, sir," returned the manager; "but really, if you
will leave gold rings on our statues, we can't be responsible, you
know."

"but you'll excuse me," pursued leander; "i don't think you quite
understood me. it isn't only the ring that's gone--it's the statue; and
if you've had it put up anywhere else"

"nonsense!" said the manager; "we don't move our statues about like
chessmen; you've forgotten where you left it, that's all. what was the
statue like?"

leander described it as well as he could, and the manager, with a
somewhat altered manner, made him point out the spot where he believed
it to have stood, and they entered the grove together.

the man gave one rapid glance at the vacant pedestal, and then gripped
leander by the shoulder, and looked at him long and hard by the feeble
light. "answer me," he said, roughly; "is this some lark of yours?"

"i look larky, don't i?" said poor tweedle, dolefully. "i thought you'd
be sure to know where it was."

"i wish to heaven i did!" cried the manager, passionately; "it's those
impudent blackguards.... they've done it under my very nose!"

"if it's any of your men," suggested leander, "can't you make them put
it back again?"

"it's not any of my men. i was warned, and, like a fool, i wouldn't
believe it could be done at a time like this; and now it's too late, and
what am i to say to the inspector? i wouldn't have had this happen for
a thousand pounds!"

"well, it's kind of you to feel so put out about it," said leander. "you
see, what makes the ring so valuable to me"

the manager was pacing up and down impatiently, entirely ignoring his
presence.

"i say," tweddle repeated, "the reason why that ring's of partickler
importance"

"oh, don't bother _me_!" said the other, shaking him off. "i don't want
to be uncivil, but i've got to think this out.... infernal rascals!" he
went on muttering.

"have the goodness to hear what i've got to say, though," persisted
leander. "i'm mixed up in this, whether you like it or not. you seem to
know who's got this figure, and i've a right to be told too. i won't go
till i get that ring back; so now you understand me!"

"confound you and your ring!" said the manager. "what's the good of
coming bully-ragging me about your ring? _i_ can't get you your ring!
you shouldn't have been fool enough to put it on one of our statues. you
make me talk to you like this, coming bothering when i've enough on my
mind as it is! hang it! can't you see i'm as anxious to get that statue
again as ever you can be? if i don't get it, i may be a ruined man, for
all i know; ain't that enough for you? look here, take my advice, and
leave me alone before we have words over this. you give me your name and
address, and you may rely on hearing from me as soon as anything turns
up. you can do no good to yourself or any one else by making a row; so
go away quiet like a sensible chap!"

leander felt stunned by the blow; evidently there was nothing to be done
but follow the manager's advice. he went to the office with him, and
gave his name and address in full, and then turned back alone to the
dancing-hall.

he had lost his ring--no ordinary trinket which he could purchase
anywhere, but one for which he would have to account--and to whom? to
his aunt and matilda. how could he tell, when there was even a chance of
seeing it again?

if only he had not allowed himself that waltz; if only he had insisted
upon remaining by the statue until his ring was removed; if only he had
not been such an idiot as to put it on! none of these acts were wrong
exactly; but between them they had brought him to this.

and the chief person responsible was miss ada parkinson, whom he dared
not reproach; for he was naturally unwilling that this last stage of the
affair should become known. he would have to dissemble, and he rejoined
his party with what he intended for a jaunty air.

"we've been waiting for you to go away," said bella. "where have you
been all this time?"

he saw with relief that ada did not appear to have mentioned the statue,
and so he said he had been "strolling about."

"and ada left to take care of herself!" said bella, spitefully. "you are
polite, mr. tweddle, i must say!"

"i haven't complained, bella, that i know of," said ada. "and mr.
tweddle and i quite understand each other, don't we?"

"oh!" said bella, with an altered manner and a side-glance at james, "i
didn't know. i'm very glad to hear it, i'm sure."

and then they left the gardens, and, after a substantial meal at a
riverside hotel, started on the homeward journey, with the sense that
their expedition had not been precisely a success.

as before, they had a railway compartment to themselves. bella declined
to talk, and lay back in her corner with closed eyes and an expression
of undeserved suffering, whilst the unfortunate jauncy sat silent and
miserable opposite.

leander would have liked to be silent too, and think out his position;
but ada would not hear of this. her jealous resentment had apparently
vanished, and she was extremely lively and playful in her sallies.

this reached a pitch when she bent forward, and, in a whisper, which she
did not, perhaps, intend to be quite confidential, said, "oh, mr.
tweddle, you never told me what became of the ring! is it off at last?"

"off? yes!" he said irritably, very nearly adding, "and the statue too."

"weren't you very glad!" said she.

"uncommonly," he replied grimly.

"let me see it again, now you've got it back," she pleaded.

"you'll excuse me," he said; "but after what has taken place, i can't
show that ring to anybody."

"then you're a cross thing!" said ada, pouting.

"what's the matter with you two, over there?" asked bella, sleepily.

ada's eyes sparkled with mischief. "let me tell them; it is too awfully
funny. i _must_!" she whispered to leander. "it's all about a ring," she
began, and enjoyed poor tweddle's evident discomfort.

"a ring?" cried bella, waking up. "don't keep all the fun to yourselves;
we've not had so much of it this evening."

"miss ada," said leander, in great agitation, "i ask you, as a lady, to
treat what has happened this evening in the strictest confidence for the
present!"

"secrets, ada?" cried her sister; "upon my word!"

"why, where's the harm, mr. tweddle, now it's all settled?" exclaimed
ada. "bella, it was only this: he went and put a ring (now do wait till
i've done, mr. tweddle!) on a certain person's finger out in those
rosherwich gardens (you see, i've not said _whose_ finger)."

"hullo, tweddle!" cried jauncy, in some bewilderment.

leander could only cast a look of miserable appeal at him.

"shall i tell them any more, mr. tweddle?" said ada, persistently.

"i don't think there's any necessity," he pleaded.

"no more do i," put in bella, archly. "i think we can guess the rest."

ada did not absolutely make any further disclosures that evening; but
for the rest of the journey she amused herself by keeping the
hairdresser in perpetual torment by her pretended revelations, until he
was thoroughly disgusted.

no longer could he admire her liveliness; he could not even see that she
was good-looking now. "she's nothing but chaff, chaff, chaff!" he
thought. "thank goodness, matilda isn't given that way. chaff before
marriage means nagging after!"

they reached the terminus at last, when he willingly said farewell to
the other three.

"good-bye, mr. tweddle," said bella, in rather a more cordial tone; "i
needn't hope _you_'ve enjoyed yourself!"

"you needn't!" he replied, almost savagely.

"good night," said ada; and added in a whisper, "don't go and dream of
your statue-woman!"

"if i dream to-night at all," he said, between his teeth, "it will be a
nightmare!"

"i suppose, tweddle, old chap," said jauncy, as he shook hands, "you
know your own affairs best; but, if you meant what you told me coming
down, you've been going it, haven't you?"

he left leander wondering impatiently what he meant. did he know the
truth? well, everybody might know it before long; there would probably
be a fuss about it all, and the best thing he could do would be to tell
matilda at once, and throw himself upon her mercy. after all, it was
innocent enough--if she could only be brought to believe it.

he did not look forward to telling her; and by the time he reached the
bank and got into an omnibus, he was in a highly nervous state, as the
following incident may serve to show.

he had taken one of those uncomfortable private omnibuses, where the
passengers are left in unlightened gloom. he sat by the door, and,
occupied as he was by his own misfortunes, paid little attention to his
surroundings.

but by-and-by, he became aware that the conductor, in collecting the
fares, was trying to attract the notice of some one who sat in the
further corner of the vehicle. "where are you for, lady, please?" he
asked repeatedly, and at last, "_will_ somebody ask the lady up the end
where i'm to set her down?" to all of which the eccentric person
addressed returned no reply whatever.

leander's attention was thus directed to her; but, although in the
obscurity he could make out nothing but a dim form of grey, his nerves
were so unsettled that he felt a curiously uneasy fancy that eyes were
being fixed upon him in the darkness.

this continued until a moment when some electric lights suddenly flashed
into the omnibus as it passed, and lit up the whole interior with a
ghastly glare, in which the grey female became distinctly visible.

he caught his breath and shrank into the corner; for in that moment his
excited imagination had traced a strange resemblance to the figure he
had left in rosherwich gardens. the inherent improbability of finding a
classical statue seated in an omnibus did not occur to him, in the state
his mind was in just then. he sat there fascinated, until lights shone
in once more, and he saw, or thought he saw, the figure slowly raise her
hand and beckon to him.

that was enough; he started up with a smothered cry, thrust a coin into
the conductor's hand, and, without waiting for change, flung himself
from the omnibus in full motion.

when its varnished sides had ceased to gleam in the light of the lamps,
and its lumbering form had been swallowed up in the autumn haze, he
began to feel what a coward his imagination had made of him.

"my nightmare's begun already," he thought. "still, she was so
surprisingly like, it did give me a turn. they oughtn't to let such
crazy females into public conveyances!"

fortunately his panic had not seized him until he was within a short
distance from bloomsbury, and it did not take him long to reach queen
square and his shop in the passage. he let himself in, and went up to a
little room on an upper floor, which he used as his sitting-room. the
person who "looked after him" did not sleep on the premises; but she
had laid a fire and left out his tea-things. "i'll have some tea," he
thought, as he lit the gas and saw them there. "i feel as if i want
cheering up, and it can't make me any more shaky than i am."

and when his fire was crackling and blazing up, and his kettle beginning
to sing, he felt more cheerful already. what, after all, if it did take
some time to get his ring again? he must make some excuse or other; and,
should the worst come to the worst, "i suppose," he thought, "i could
get another made like it--though, when i come to think of it, i'll be
shot if i remember exactly what it was like, or what the words inside it
were, to be sure about them; still, very likely old vidler would
recollect, and i dessay it won't turn out to be necessawhat the
devil's that?"

he had the house to himself after nightfall, and he remembered that his
private door could not be opened now without a special key; yet he could
not help a fancy that some one was groping his way up the staircase
outside.

"it's only the boards creaking, or the pipes leaking through," he
thought. "i must have the place done up. but i'm as nervous as a cat
to-night."

the steps were nearer and nearer--they stopped at the door--there was a
loud commanding blow on the panels.

"who's here at this time of night?" cried leander, aloud. "come in, if
you want to!"

but the door remained shut, and there came another rap, even more
imperious.

"i shall go mad if this goes on!" he muttered, and making a desperate
rush to the door, threw it wide open, and then staggered back
panic-stricken.

upon the threshold stood a tall figure in classical drapery. his eyes
might have deceived him in the omnibus; but here, in the crude gaslight,
he could not be mistaken. it was the statue he had last seen in
rosherwich gardens--now, in some strange and wondrous way,
moving--alive!

a distinguished stranger

iii.

"how could it be a dream? yet there
she stood, the moveless image fair!"

_the earthly paradise._

with slow and stately tread the statue advanced towards the centre of
the hairdresser's humble sitting-room, and stood there awhile, gazing
about her with something of scornful wonder in her calm cold face. as
she turned her head, the wide, deeply-cut sockets seemed the home of
shadowy eyes; her face, her bared arms, and the long straight folds of
her robe were all of the same greyish-yellow hue; the boards creaked
under her sandalled feet, and leander felt that he had never heard of a
more appallingly massive ghost--if ghost indeed she were.

he had retired step by step before her to the hearthrug, where he now
stood shivering, with the fire hot at his back, and his kettle still
singing on undismayed. he made no attempt to account for her presence
there on any rationalistic theory. a statue had suddenly come to life,
and chosen to pay him a nocturnal visit; he knew no more than that,
except that he would have given worlds for courage to show it the door.

the spectral eyes were bent upon him, as if in expectation that he
would begin the conversation, and, at last, with a very unmanageable
tongue, he managed to observe--

"did you want to see me on--on business, mum?"

but the statue only relaxed her lips in a haughty smile.

"for goodness' sake, say something!" he cried wildly; "unless you want
me to jump out of the winder! what is it you've come about?"

it seemed to him that in some way a veil had lifted from the stone face,
leaving it illumined by a strange light, and from the lips came a voice
which addressed him in solemn far-away tones, as of one talking in
sleep. he could not have said with certainty that the language was his
own, though somehow he understood her perfectly.

"you know me not?" she said, with a kind of sad indifference.

"well," leander admitted, as politely as his terror would allow, "you
certingly have the advantage of me for the moment, mum."

"i am aphrodite the foam-born, the matchless seed of ægis-bearing zeus.
many names have i amongst the sons of men, and many temples, and i sway
the hearts of all lovers; and gods--yea, and mortals--have burned for
me, a goddess, with an unconsuming, unquenchable fire!"

"lor!" said leander. if he had not been so much flurried, he might have
found a remark worthier of the occasion, but the announcement that she
was a goddess took his breath away. he had quite believed that goddesses
were long since "gone out."

"you know wherefore i am come hither?" she said.

"not at this minute, i don't," he replied. "you'll excuse me, but you
can't be the statue out of those gardens? you reelly are so surprisingly
like, that i couldn't help asking you."

"i am aphrodite, and no statue. long--how long i know not--have i lain
entranced in slumber in my sea-girt isle of cyprus, and now again has
the living touch of a mortal hand upon one of my sacred images called me
from my rest, and given me power to animate this marble shell. some hand
has placed this ring upon my finger. tell me, was it yours?"

leander was almost reassured; after all, he could forgive her for
terrifying him so much, since she had come on so good-natured an errand.

"quite correct, mum--miss!" (he wished he knew the proper form for
addressing a goddess) "that ring is my property. i'm sure it's very
civil and friendly of you to come all this way about it," and he held
out his hand for it eagerly.

"and think you it was for this that i have visited the face of the earth
and the haunts of men, and followed your footsteps hither by roads
strange and unknown to me? you are too modest, youth."

"i don't know what there is modest in expecting you to behave honest!"
he said, rather wondering at his own audacity.

"how are you called?" she inquired suddenly on this; and after hearing
the answer, remarked that the name was known to her as that of a goodly
and noble youth who had perished for the sake of hero.

"the gentleman may have been a connection of mine, for all i know," he
said; "the tweddles have always kep' themselves respectable. but i'm not
a hero myself, i'm a hairdresser."

she repeated the word thoughtfully, though she did not seem to quite
comprehend it; and indeed it is likely enough that, however intelligible
she was to leander, the understanding was far from being entirely
reciprocal.

she extended her hand to him, smiling not ungraciously. "leander," she
said, "cease to tremble, for a great happiness is yours. bold have you
been; yet am i not angered, for i come. cast, then, away all fear, and
know that aphrodite disdains not to accept a mortal's plighted troth!"

leander entrenched himself promptly behind the armchair. "i don't know
what you're talking about!" he said. "how can i help fearing, with you
coming down on me like this? ask yourself."

"can you not understand that your prayer is heard?" she demanded.

"_what_ prayer?" cried leander.

"crass and gross-witted has the world grown!" said she; "a greek swain
would have needed but few words to divine his bliss. know, then, that
your suit is accepted; never yet has aphrodite turned the humblest from
her shrine. by this symbol," and she lightly touched the ring, "you have
given yourself to me. i accept the offering--you are mine!"

leander was stupefied by such an unlooked-for misconception. he could
scarcely believe his ears; but he hastened to set himself right at once.

"if you mean that you were under the impression that i meant anything in
particular by putting that ring on, it was all a mistake, mum," he said.
"i shouldn't have presumed to it!"

"were you the lowliest of men, i care not," she replied; "to you i owe
the power i now enjoy of life and vision, nor shall you find me
ungrateful. but forbear this false humility; i like it not. come, then,
leander, at the bidding of cypris; come, and fear nothing!"

but he feared very much, for he had seen the operas of _don giovanni_
and _zampa_, and knew that any familiarity with statuary was likely to
have unpleasant consequences. he merely strengthened his defences with a
chair.

"you must excuse me, mum, you must indeed," he faltered; "i can't come!"

"why?" she asked.

"because i've other engagements," he replied.

"i remember," she said slowly, "in the grove, when light met my eyes
once more, there was a maid with you, one who laughed and was merry.
answer--is she your love?"

"no, she isn't," he said shortly. "what if she was?"

"if she were," observed the goddess, with the air of one who mentioned
an ordinary fact, "i should crush her!"

"lord bless me!" cried leander, in his horror. "what for?"

"would not she be in my path? and shall any mortal maid stand between me
and my desire?"

this was a discovery. she was a jealous and vengeful goddess; she would
require to be sedulously humoured, or harm would come.

"well, well," he said soothingly, "there's nothing of that sort about
her, i do assure you."

"then i spare her," said the goddess. "but how, then, if this be truly
so, do you still shrink from the honour before you?"

leander felt a natural unwillingness to explain that it was because he
was engaged to a young lady who kept the accounts at a florist's.

"well, the fact is," he said awkwardly, "there's difficulties in the
way."

"difficulties? i can remove them all!" she said.

"not _these_ you can't, mum. it's like this: you and me, we don't start,
so to speak, from the same basin. i don't mean it as any reproach to
you, but you can't deny you're an eathen, and, worse than that, an
eathen goddess. now all my family have been brought up as chapel folk,
primitive methodists, and i've been trained to have a horror of
superstition and idolatries, and see the folly of it. so you can see for
yourself that we shouldn't be likely to get on together!"

"you talk words," she said impatiently; "but empty are they, and
meaningless to my ears. one thing i learn from them--that you seek to
escape me!"

"that's putting it too harsh, mum," he protested. "i'm sure i feel the
honour of such a call; and, by the way, do you mind telling me how you
got my address--how you found me out, i mean?"

"no one remains long hid from the searching eye of the high gods," she
replied.

"so i should be inclined to say," agreed leander. "but only tell me
this, wasn't it you in the omnibus? we call our public conveyances
omnibuses, as perhaps you mayn't know."

"i, sea-born aphrodite, _i_ in a public conveyance, an omnibus? there is
an impiety in such a question!"

"well, i only thought it might have been," he stammered, rather relieved
upon the whole that it was not the goddess who had seen his precipitate
bolt from the vehicle. who the female in the corner really was, he never
knew; though a man of science might account for the resemblance she bore
to the statue by ascribing it to one of those preparatory impressions
projected occasionally by a strong personality upon a weak one. but
leander was content to leave the matter unexplained.

"let it suffice you," she said, "that i am here; and once more, leander,
are you prepared to fulfil the troth you have plighted?"

"i--i can't say i am," he said. "not that i don't feel thankful for
having had the refusal of so very 'igh-class an opportunity; but, as i'm
situated at present--what with the state of trade, and unbelief so
rampant, and all--i'm obliged to decline with respectful thanks."

he trusted that after this she would see the propriety of going.

"have a care!" she said; "you are young and not uncomely, and my heart
pities you. do nothing rash. pause, ere you rouse the implacable ire of
aphrodite!"

"thank you," said leander; "if you'll allow me, i will. i don't want any
ill-feeling, i'm sure. it's my wish to live peaceable with all men."

"i leave you, then. use the time before you till i come again in
thinking well whether he acts wisely who spurns the proffered hand of
idalian aphrodite. for the present, farewell, leander!"

he was overjoyed at his coming deliverance. "good evening, mum," he
said, as he ran to the door and held it open. "if you'll allow me, i'll
light you down the staircase--it's rather dark, i'm afraid."

"_fool!_,'" she said with scorn, and without stirring from her place;
and, as she spoke the word, the veil seemed to descend over her face
again, the light faded out, and, with a slight shudder, the figure
imperceptibly resumed its normal attitude, the drapery stiffened once
more into chiselled folds, and the statue was soulless as are statues
generally.

from bad to worse

iv.

"and the shadow flits and fleets,
and will not let me be,
and i loathe the squares and streets!"

_maud._

for some time after the statue had ceased to give signs of life, the
hairdresser remained gaping, incapable of thought or action. at last he
ventured to approach cautiously, and on touching the figure, found it
perfectly cold and hard. the animating principle had plainly departed,
and left the statue a stone.

"she's gone," he said, "and left her statue behind her! well, of all the
_goes_she's come out without her pedestal, too! to be sure, it would
have been in her way, walking."

seating himself in his shabby old armchair, he tried to collect his
scattered wits. he scarcely realised, even yet, what had happened; but,
unless he had dreamed it all, he had been honoured by the marked
attentions of a marble statue, instigated by a heathen goddess, who
insisted that his affections were pledged to her.

perhaps there was a spice of flattery in such a situation--for it cannot
fall to the lot of many hairdressers to be thus distinguished--but
leander was far too much alarmed to appreciate it. there had been
suggestions of menace in the statue's remarks which made him shudder
when he recalled them, and he started violently once or twice when some
wavering of the light gave a play of life to the marble mask. "she's
coming back!" he thought. "oh, i do wish she wouldn't!" but aphrodite
continued immovable, and at last he concluded that, as he put it, she
"had done for the evening."

his first reflection was--what had best be done? the wisest course
seemed to be to send for the manager of the gardens, and restore the
statue while its animation was suspended. the people at the gardens
would take care that it did not get loose again.

but there was the ring; he must get that off first. here was an
unhoped-for opportunity of accomplishing this in privacy, and at his
leisure. again approaching the figure, he tried to draw off the
compromising circle; but it seemed tighter than ever, and he drew out a
pair of scissors and, after a little hesitation, respectfully inserted
it under the hoop and set to work to prize it off, with the result of
snapping both the points, and leaving the ring entirely unaffected. he
glanced at the face; it wore the same dreamy smile, with a touch of
gentle contempt in it. "she don't seem to mind," he said aloud; "to be
sure, she ain't inside of it now, as far as i make it out. i've got all
night before me to get the confounded thing off, and i'll go on till
i've done it!"

but he laboured on with the disabled scissors, and only succeeded in
scratching the smooth marble a little; he stopped to pant. "there's only one
way," he told himself desperately; "a little diamond cement would make
it all right again; and you expect cracks in a statue."

then, after a furtive glance around, he fetched the poker from the
fireplace. he felt horribly brutal, as if he were going to mutilate and
maltreat a creature that could feel; but he nerved himself to tap the
back of aphrodite's hand at the dimpled base of the third finger. the
shock ran up to his elbow, and gave him acute "pins and needles," but
the stone hand was still intact. he struck again--this time with all his
force--and the poker flew from his grasp, and his arm dropped paralyzed
by his side.

he could scarcely lift it again for some minutes, and the warning made
him refrain from any further violence. "it's no good," he groaned. "if i
go on, i don't know what may happen to me. i must wait till she comes
to, and then ask her for the ring, very polite and civil, and try if i
can't get round her that way."

he was determined that he would never give her up to the gardens while
she wore his ring; but, in the mean time, he could scarcely leave the
statue standing in the middle of his sitting-room, where it would most
assuredly attract the charwoman's attention.

he had little cupboards on each side of his fireplace: one of these had
no shelves, and served for storing firewood and bottles of various
kinds. from this he removed the contents, and lifting the statue, which,
possibly because its substance had been affected in some subtle and
inexplicable manner by the vital principle that had so lately permeated
it, proved less ponderous than might have been reasonably expected, he
pushed it well into the recess, and turned the key on it.

then he went trembling to bed, and, after an interval of muddled,
anxious thinking, fell into a heavy sleep, which lasted until far into
the morning.

he woke with the recollection that something unpleasant was hanging over
him, and by degrees he remembered what that something was; but it looked
so extravagant in the morning light that he had great hopes all would
turn out to be a mere dream.

it was a mild sunday morning, and there were church bells ringing all
around him; it seemed impossible that he could really be harbouring an
animated antique. but to remove all doubt, he stole down, half dressed,
to his small sitting-room, which he found looking as usual--the fire
burning dull and dusty in the sunlight that struck in through the open
window, and his breakfast laid out on the table.

almost reassured, he went to the cupboard and unlocked the door. alas!
it held its skeleton--the statue was there, preserving the attitude of
queenly command in which he had seen it first. sharply he shut the door
again, and turned the key with a heavy heart.

he swallowed his breakfast with very little appetite, after which he
felt he could not remain in the house. "to sit here with _that_ in the
cupboard is more than i'm equal to all sunday," he decided.

if matilda had been at his aunt's, with whom she lodged, he would have
gone to chapel with her; but matilda did not return from her holiday
till late that night. he thought of going to his friend and asking his
advice on his case. james, as a barrister's clerk, would presumably be
able to give a sound legal opinion on an emergency.

james, however, lived "out camden town way," and was certain on so fine
a morning to be away on some sunday expedition with his betrothed: it
was hopeless to go in search of him now. if he went to see his aunt, who
lived close by in millman street, she might ask him about the ring, and
there would be a fuss. he was in no humour for attending any place of
public worship, and so he spent some hours in aimless wandering about
the streets, which, as foreigners are fond of reminding us, are not
exhilarating even on the brightest sabbath, and did not raise his
spirits then.

at last hunger drove him back to the passage in southampton row, the
more quickly as it began to occur to him that the statue might possibly
have revived, and be creating a disturbance in the cupboard.

he had passed the narrow posts, and was just taking out his latchkey,
when some one behind touched his shoulder and made him give a guilty
jump. he dreaded to find the goddess at his elbow; however, to his
relief, he found a male stranger, plainly and respectably dressed.

"you mr. tweddle the hairdresser?" the stranger inquired.

leander felt a wild impulse to deny it, and declare that he was his own
friend, and had come to see himself on business, for he was in no social
mood just then; but he ended by admitting that he supposed he was mr.
tweddle.

"so did i. well, i want a little private talk with you, mr. tweddle.
i've been hanging about for some time; but though i knocked and rang, i
couldn't make a soul hear."

"there isn't a soul inside," protested tweddle, with unnecessary warmth;
"not a solitary soul! you wanted to talk with me. suppose we take a turn
round the square?"

"no, no. i won't keep you out; i'll come in with you!"

inwardly wondering what his visitor wanted, leander led him in and lit
the gas in his hair-cutting saloon. "we shall be cosier here," he said;
for he dared not take the stranger up in the room where the statue was
concealed, for fear of accidents.

the man sat down in the operating-chair and crossed his legs. "i dare
say you're wondering what i've come about like this on a sunday
afternoon?" he began.

"not at all," said leander. "anything i can have the pleasure of doing
for you"

"it's only to answer a few questions. i understand you lost a ring at
the rosherwich gardens yesterday evening: that's so, isn't it?"

he was a military looking person, as leander now perceived, and he had a
close-trimmed iron-grey beard, a high colour, quick eyes, and a stiff
hard-lipped mouth--not at all the kind of man to trifle with. and yet
leander felt no inclination to tell him his story; the stranger might be
a reporter, and his adventure would "get into the papers"--perhaps reach
matilda's eyes.

"i--i dropped a ring last night, certainly," he said; "it may have been
in the gardens, for what i know."

"now, now," said the stranger, "don't you _know_ it was in the gardens?
tell me all about it."

"begging your pardon," said leander, "i should like to know first what
call you have to _be_ told."

"you're quite right--perfectly right. i always deal straightforwardly
when i can. i'll tell you who i am. i'm inspector bilbow, of the
criminal investigation department, scotland yard. now, perhaps, you'll
see i'm not a man to be kept in the dark. and i want you to tell me when
and where you last saw that ring of yours: it's to your own interest, if
you want to see it again."

but leander _had_ seen it again, and it seemed certain that all scotland
yard could not assist him in getting it back; he must manage it
single-handed.

"it's very kind of you, mr. inspector, to try and find it for me," he
said; "but the fact is, it--it ain't so valuable as i fancied. i can't
afford to have it traced--it's not worth it!"

the inspector laughed. "i never said it was, that i know. the job i'm in
charge of is a bigger concern than your trumpery ring, my friend."

"then i don't see what i've got to do with it," said leander.

the officer had taken his measure by this time; he must admit his man
into a show of confidence, and appeal to his vanity, if he was to obtain
any information he could rely upon.

"you're a shrewd chap, i see; 'nothing for nothing' is your motto, eh?
well, if you help me in this, and put me on the track i want, it'll be a
fine thing for you. you'll be a principal witness at the police-court;
name in the papers; regular advertisement for you!"

this prospect, had he known it--but even inspectors cannot know
everything--was the last which could appeal to leander in his peculiar
position. "i don't care for notoriety," he said loftily; "i scorn it."

"oho!" said the inspector, shifting his ground. "well, you don't want to
impede the course of justice, do you?--because that's what you seem to
me to be after, and you won't find it pay in the long run. i'll get this
out of you in a friendly way if i can; if not, some other way. come,
give me your account, fair and full, of how you came to lose that ring;
there's no help for it--you must!"

leander saw this and yielded. after all, it did not much matter, for of
course he would not touch upon the strange sequel of his ill-omened act;
so he told the story faithfully and circumstantially, while the
inspector took it all down in his note-book, questioning him closely
respecting the exact time of each occurrence.

at last he closed his note-book with a snap. "i'm not obliged to tell
you anything in return for all this," he said; "but i will, and then
you'll see the importance of holding your tongue till i give you leave
to talk about it."

"_i_ shan't talk about it," said leander.

"i don't advise you to. i suppose you've heard of that affair at
wricklesmarsh court? what! not that business where a gang broke into the
sculpture gallery, one of the finest private collections in england? you
surprise me!"

"and what did they steal?" asked leander.

"they stole the figure whose finger you were ass enough (if you'll allow
me the little familiarity) to put your ring on. what do you think of
that?"

a wild rush of ideas coursed through the hairdresser's head. was this
policeman "after" the goddess upstairs? did he know anything more? would
it be better to give up the statue at once and get rid of it? but
then--his ring would be lost for ever!

"it's surprising," he said at last. "but what did they want to go and
burgle a plaster figure for?"

"that's where it is, you see; she ain't plaster--she's marble, a genuine
antic of venus, and worth thousands. the beggars who broke in knew that,
and took nothing else. they'd made all arrangements to get away with her
abroad, and pass her off on some foreign collection before it got blown
upon; and they'd have done it too if we hadn't been beforehand with
them! so what do they do then? they drive up with her to these gardens,
ask to see the manager, and say they're agents for some fine arts
business, and have a sample with them, to be disposed of at a low price.
the manager, so he tells me, had a look at it, thought it a neat article
and suitable to the style of his gardens. he took it to be plain
plaster, as they said, and they put it up for him their own selves,
near the small gate up by the road; then they took the money--a pound or
two they asked for it--and drove away, and he saw no more of them."

"and was that all they got for their pains?" said leander.

the inspector smiled indulgently. "don't you see your way yet?" he
asked. "can't you give a guess where that statue's got to now, eh?"

"no," said leander, with what seemed to the inspector a quite
uncalled-for excitement, "of course i can't! what do you ask me for? how
should i know?"

"quite so," said the other; "you want a mind trained to deal with these
things. it may surprise you to hear it, but i know as well how that
statue disappeared, and what was done with her, as if i'd been there!"

"do you, though?" thought leander, who was beginning to doubt whether
his visitor's penetration was anything so abnormal. "what was done with
her?" he asked.

"why, it was a plant from the first. they knew all their regular holes
were stopped, and they wanted a place to dump her down in, where she
wouldn't attract attention, till they could call for her again; so they
got her taken in at the gardens, where they could come in any time by
the gate and fetch her off again--and very neatly it was done, too!"

"but where do you make out they've taken her to now?" asked leander, who
was naturally anxious to discover if the official had any suspicions of
him.

"i've my own theory about that," was his answer. "i shall hunt that
venus down, sir; i'll stake my reputation on it."

"venus is her name, it seems," thought leander. "she told me it was
aphrodite. but perhaps the other's her christian name. it can't be the
venus i've seen pictures of--she's dressed too decent."

"yes," repeated the inspector, "i shall hunt her down now. i don't envy
the poor devil who's giving her house-room; he'll have reason to repent
it!"

"how do you know any one's giving her house-room?" inquired leander;
"and why should he repent it?"

"ask your own common sense. they daren't take her back to any of their
own places; they know better. they haven't left the country with her.
what remains? they've bribed or got over some mug of an outsider to be
their accomplice, and a bad speculation he'll find it, too."

"what would be done to him?" asked the hairdresser, with a quite
unpleasant internal sensation.

"that is a question i wouldn't pretend to decide; but i've no hesitation
in saying that the party on whose premises that statue is discovered
will wish he'd died before he ever set eyes on her."

"you're quite right there!" said leander. "well, sir, i'm afraid i
haven't been much assistance to you."

"never mind that," said the inspector, encouragingly; "you've answered
my questions; you've not hindered the law, and that's a game some burn
their fingers at."

leander let him out, and returned to his saloon with his head in a worse
whirl than before. he did not think the detective suspected him. he was
clearly barking up the wrong tree at present; but so acute a mind could
not be long deceived, and if once leander was implicated his guilt would
appear beyond denial. would the police believe that the statue had run
after him? no one would believe it! to be found in possession of that
fatal work of art would inevitably ruin him.

he might carry her away to some lonely spot and leave her, but where was
the use? she would only come back again; or he might be taken in the
act. he dared not destroy her; his right arm had been painful all day
after that last attempt.

if he gave her up to the authorities, he would have to explain how he
came to be in a position to do so, which, as he now saw, would be a
difficult undertaking; and even then he would lose all chance of
recovering his ring in time to satisfy his aunt and matilda. there was
no way out of it, unless he could induce venus to give up the token and
leave him alone.

"cuss her!" he said angrily; "a pretty bog she's led me into, she and
that minx, ada parkinson!"

he felt so thoroughly miserable that hunger had vanished, and he dreaded
the idea of an evening at home, though it was a blusterous night, with
occasional vicious spirts of rain, and by no means favourable to
continued pacing of streets and squares.

"i'm hanged if i don't think i'll go to church!" he thought; "and
perhaps i shall feel more equal to supper afterwards."

he went upstairs to get his best hat and overcoat, and was engaged in
brushing the former in his sitting-room, when from within the cupboard
he heard a shower of loud raps.

his knees trembled. "she's wuss than any ghost!" he thought; but he took
no notice, and went on brushing his hat, while he endeavoured to hum a
hymn.

"leander!" cried the clear, hard voice he knew too well, "i have
returned. release me!"

his first idea was to run out of the house and seek sanctuary in some
pew in the opposite church. "but there," he thought disgustedly, "she'd
only come in and sit next to me. no, i'll pluck up a spirit and have it
out with her!" and he threw open the door.

"how have you dared to imprison me in this narrow tomb?" she demanded
majestically, as she stepped forth.

leander cringed. "it's a nice roomy cupboard," he said. "i thought
perhaps you wouldn't mind putting up with it, especially as you invited
yourself," he could not help adding.

"when i found myself awake and in utter darkness," she said, "i thought
you had buried me beneath the soil."

"buried you!" he exclaimed, with a sudden perception that he might do
worse.

"and in that thought i was preparing to invoke the forces that lie below
the soil to come to my aid, burst the masses that impeded me, and
overwhelm you and all this ugly swarming city in one vast ruin!"

"i won't bury her," leander decided. "i'm sorry you hadn't a better
opinion of me, mum," he said aloud. "you see, how you came to be in
there was this way: when you went out, like the snuff of a candle, so to
speak, you left your statue standing in the middle of the floor, and i
had to put it somewhere where it wouldn't be seen."

"you did well," she said indulgently, "to screen my image from the
vulgar sight; and if you had no statelier shrine wherein to instal it,
the fault lies not with you. you are pardoned."

"thank you, mum," said leander; "and now let me ask you if you intend to
animate that statue like this as a regular thing?"

"so long as your obstinacy continues, or until it outlives my
forbearance, i shall return at intervals," she said. "why do you ask
this?"

"well," said leander, with a sinking heart, but hoping desperately to
move her by the terrors of the law, "it's my duty to tell you that that
image you're in is stolen property."

"has it been stolen from one of my temples?" she asked.

"i dare say--i don't know; but there's the police moving heaven and
earth to get you back again!"

"he is good and pious--the police, and if i knew him i would reward
him."

"there's a good many hims in the police--that's what we call our guards
for the street, who take up thieves and bad characters; and, being
stolen, they're all of 'em after _you_; and if they had a notion where
you were, they'd be down on you, and back you'd go to wherever you've
come from--some gallery, i believe, where you wouldn't get away again in
a hurry! now, i tell you what it is, if you don't give me up that ring,
and go away and leave me in quiet, i'll tell the police who you are and
where you are. i mean what i say, by george i do!"

"we know not george, nor will it profit you to invoke him now," said the
goddess. "see, i will deign to reason with you as with some froward
child. think you that, should the guards seize my image, _i_ should
remain within, or that it is aught to me where this marble presentment
finds a resting-place while i am absent therefrom? but for you, should
you surrender it into their hands, would there be no punishment for your
impiety in thus concealing a divine effigy?"

"she ain't no fool!" thought leander; "she mayn't understand our ways,
but she's a match for me notwithstanding. i must try another line."

"lady venus," he began, "if that's the proper way to call you, i didn't
mean any threats--far from it. i'll be as humble as you please. you look
a good-natured lady; you wouldn't want to make a man uncomfortable, i'm
sure. do give me back that ring, for mercy's sake! if i haven't got it
to show in a day or two, i shall be ruined!"

"should any mortal require the ring of you, you have but to reply, 'i
have placed it upon the finger of aphrodite, whose spouse i am!' thus
will you have honour amongst mortals, being held blameless!"

"blameless!" cried leander, in pardonable exasperation. "that's all you
know about it! and what am i to say to the lady it lawfully belongs to?"

"you have lied to me, then, and you are already affianced! tell me the
abode of this maiden of yours."

"what do you want it for?" he inquired, hoping faintly she might intend
to restore the ring.

"to seek it out, to go to her abode, to crush her! is she not my rival?"

"crush my matilda?" he cried in agony. "you'll never do such a thing as
that?"

"you have revealed her name! i have but to ask in your streets, 'where
abideth matilda, the beloved of leander, the dresser of hair? lead me to
her dwelling.' and having arrived thereat, i shall crush her, and thus
she shall deservedly perish!"

he was horrified at the possible effects of his slip, which he hastened
to repair. "you won't find it so easy to come at her, luckily," he said;
"there's hundreds of matildas in london alone."

"then," said the goddess, sweetly and calmly, "it is simple: i shall
crush them all."

"oh, lor!" whimpered leander, "here's a bloodthirsty person! where's the
sense of doing that?"

"because, dissipated reveller that you are, you love them."

"now, when did i ever say i loved them? i don't even know more than two
or three, and those i look on as sisters--in fact" (here he hit upon a
lucky evasion) "they _are_ sisters--it's only another name for them.
i've a brother and three matildas, and here are you talking of crushing
my poor sisters as if they were so many beadles--all for nothing!"

"is this the truth? palter not with me! you are pledged to no mortal
bride?"

"i'm a bachelor. and as for the ring, it belongs to my aunt, who's over
fifty."

"then no one stands between us, and you are mine!"

"don't talk so ridiculous! i tell you i ain't yours--it's a free
country, this is!"

"if i--an immortal--can stoop thus, it becomes you not to reject the
dazzling favour."

a last argument occurred to him. "but i reelly don't think, mum," he
said persuasively, "that you can be quite aware of the extent of the
stoop. the fact is, i am, as i've tried to make you understand, a
hairdresser; some might lower themselves so far as to call me a barber.
now, hairdressing, whatever may be said for it" (he could not readily
bring himself to decry his profession)--"hairdressing is considribly
below you in social rank. i wouldn't deceive you by saying otherwise. i
assure you that, if you had any ideer what a barber was, you wouldn't be
so pressing."

she seemed to be struck by this. "you say well!" she observed,
thoughtfully; "your occupation may be base and degrading, and if so, it
were well for me to know it."

"if you were once to see me in my daily avocations," he urged, "you'd
see what a mistake you're making."

"enough! i will see you--and at once. barb, that i may know the nature
of your toil!"

"i can't do that now," he objected; "i haven't got a customer."

"then fetch one, and barb with it immediately. you must have your tools
by you; so delay not!"

"a customer ain't a tool!" he groaned, "it's a fellow-man; and no one
will come in to-night, because it's sunday. (don't ask me what sunday
is, because you wouldn't understand if i tried to tell you!) and i don't
carry on my business up here, but below in the saloon."

"i will go thither and behold you."

"no!" he exclaimed. "do you want to ruin me?"

"i will make no sign; none shall recognise me for what i am. but come i
will!"

leander pondered awhile. there was danger in introducing the goddess
into his saloon; he had no idea what she might do there. but at the same
time, if she were bent upon coming, she would probably do so in any
case; and besides, he felt tolerably certain that what she would see
would convince her of his utter unsuitability as a consort.

yes, it was surely wisest to assist necessity, and obtain the most
favourable conditions for the inevitable experiment.

"i might put you in a corner of the operating-room, to be sure," he said
thoughtfully. "no one would think but what you was part of the fittings,
unless you went moving about."

"place me where i may behold you at your labour, and there i will
remain," she said.

"well," he conceded, "i'll risk it. the best way would be for you to
walk down to the saloon, and leave yourself ready in a corner till you
come to again. i can't carry a heavy marble image all that way!"

"so be it," said she, and followed him to the saloon with a proud
docility.

"it's nicely got up," he remarked, as they reached it; "and you'll find
it roomier than the cupboard."

she deigned no answer as she remained motionless in the corner he had
indicated; and presently, as he held up the candle he was carrying, he
found its rays were shining upon a senseless stone.

he went upstairs again, half fearful, half sanguine. "i don't altogether
like it," he was thinking. "but if i put a print wrapper over her all
day, no one will notice. and goddesses must have their proper pride. if
she once gets it into her marble head that i keep a shop, i think that
she'll turn up her nose at me. and then she'll give back the ring and go
away, and i shan't be afraid of the police; and i needn't tell tillie
anything about it. it's worth risking."

an experiment

v.

"'tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach:
strike all that look upon with marvel."

_the winter's tale._

the next day brought leander a letter which made his heart beat with
mingled emotions--it was from his matilda. it had evidently been written
immediately before her return, and told him that she would be at their
old meeting-place (the statue of fox in bloomsbury square) at eight
o'clock that evening.

the wave of tenderness which swept over him at the anticipation of this
was hurled back by an uncomfortable thought. what if matilda were to
refer to the ring? but no; his matilda would do nothing so indelicate.

all through the day he mechanically went through his hairdressing,
singeing, and shampooing operations, divided between joy at the prospect
of seeing his adored matilda again, and anxiety respecting the cold
marble swathed in the print wrapper, which stood in the corner of his
hair-cutting saloon.

he glanced at it every time he went past to change a brush or heat a
razor, but there was no sign of movement under the folds, and he
gradually became reassured, especially as it excited no remark.

but as evening drew on he felt that, for the success of his experiment,
it was necessary that the cover should be removed. it was dangerous,
supposing the inspector were to come in unexpectedly and recognise the
statue; but he could only trust to fortune for that, and hoped, too,
that even if the detective came he would be able to keep him in the
outer shop.

it was only for one evening, and it was well worth the risk.

a foreign gentleman had come in, and the hairdresser found that a fresh
wrapper was required, which gave him the excuse he wanted for unveiling
the aphrodite. he looked carefully at the face as he uncovered it, but
could discover no speculation as yet in the calm, full gaze of the
goddess.

the foreign gentleman was inclined to be talkative under treatment, and
the conversation came round to public amusements.

"in my country," the customer said, without mentioning or betraying what
his particular country was--"in my country we have what you have not,
places to sit out in the fresh air, and drink a glass of beer, along
with the entertainments. you have not that in london?"

"bless your soul, yes," said leander, who was a true patriot, "plenty of
them!"

"oh, i did not aware that; but who?"

"well," said the hairdresser, "there's the eagle in the city road, for
one; and there's the surrey gardens; and there's rosherwich," he added,
after a pause. (the fisheries exhibition, it may be said, was as yet
unknown.)

"and you go there, often?"

"i've been to rosherwich."

"was it goot there--you laike it, eh?"

"well," said leander, "they tell me it's very gay in the season.
p'rhaps i went at the wrong time of the year for it."

"what you call wrong time for it?"

"slack--nothing going on," he explained; "like it was when i went last
saturday."

"you went last saturday? and you stay a long time?"

"i didn't stay no longer than i could help," leander said. "all our
party was glad to get away."

the foreigner had risen to go, when his eyes fell on the venus in the
corner.

"you did not stay long, and your party was glad to come away?" he
repeated absently. "i am not surprised at that." he gave the hairdresser
a long stare as he spoke. "no, i am not surprised.... you have a good
taste, my friend; you laike the antique, do you not?" he broke off
suddenly.

"ah! you are looking at the venus, sir," said leander. "yes, i'm very
partial to it."

"it is a taste that costs," his customer said.

he looked back over his shoulder as he left the shop, and once more
repeated softly, "yes, it is a taste that costs."

"i suppose," leander reflected as he went back, "it does strike people
as queer, my keeping that statue there; but it's only for one evening."

the foreigner had scarcely left when an old gentleman, a regular
customer, looked in, on his way from the city, and at once noticed the
innovation. he was an old gentleman who had devoted much time and study
to art, in the intervals of business, and had developed critical powers
of the highest order.

he walked straight up to the venus, and stuck out his under lip. "where
did you get that thing?" he inquired. "isn't this place of yours small
enough, without lumbering it up with statuary out of the euston road?"

"i didn't get it there," said leander. "i--i thought it would be 'andy
to 'ang the 'ats on."

"dear, dear," said the old gentleman, "why do you people dabble in
matters you don't understand? come here, tweddle, and let me show you.
can't you _see_ what a miserable sham the thing is--a cheap, tawdry
imitation of the splendid classic type? why, by merely exhibiting such a
thing, you're vitiating public taste, sir--corrupting it."

leander did not quite follow this rebuke, which he thought was probably
based upon the goddess's antecedents.

"was she reelly as bad as that, sir?" he said. "i wasn't aware so, or i
shouldn't give any offence to customers by letting her stay here."

as he spoke he saw the indefinable indications in the statue's face
which denoted that it was instinct once more with life and intelligence,
and he was horrified at the thought that the latter part of the
conversation might have been overheard.

"but i've always understood," he said, hastily, "that the party this
represents was puffickly correct, however free some of the others might
have been; and i suppose that's the costume of the period she's in, and
very becoming it is, i'm sure, though gone out since."

"bah!" said the old gentleman, "it's poor art. i'll show you _where_ the
thing is bad. i happen to understand something of these things. just
observe how the top of the head is out of drawing; look at the lowness
of the forehead, and the distance between the eyes; all the canons of
proportion ignored--absolutely ignored!"

what further strictures this rash old gentleman was preparing to pass
upon the statue will never be known now, for tweddle already thought he
could discern a growing resentment in her face, under so much candour.
he could not stand by and allow so excellent a customer to be crushed on
the floor of his saloon, and he knew the venus quite capable of this:
was she not perpetually threatening such a penalty, on much slighter
provocation?

he rushed between the unconscious man and his fate. "i think you said
your hair cut?" he said, and laid violent hands upon the critic, forced
him protesting into a chair, throttled him with a towel, and effectually
diverted his attention by a series of personal remarks upon the top of
his head.

the victim, while he was being shampooed, showed at first an alarming
tendency to revert to the subject of the goddess's defects, but leander
was able to keep him in check by well-timed jets of scalding water and
ice-cold sprays, which he directed against his customer's exposed crown,
until every idea, except impotent rage, was washed out of it, while a
hard machine brush completed the subjugation.

finally, the unfortunate old man staggered out of the shop, preserved by
leander's unremitting watchfulness from the wrath of the goddess. yet,
such is the ingratitude of human nature, that he left the place vowing
to return no more. "i thought i'd got a _clown_ behind me, sir!" he used
to say afterwards, in describing it.

before leander could recover from the alarm he had been thrown into,
another customer had entered; a pale young man, with a glossy hat, a
white satin necktie, and a rather decayed gardenia. he, too, was one of
tweddle's regular clients. what his occupation might be was a mystery,
for he aimed at being considered a man of pleasure.

"i say, just shave me, will you?" he said, and threw himself languidly
into a chair. "fact is, tweddle, i've been so doosid chippy for the last
two days, i daren't touch a razor."

"indeed, sir!" said leander, with respectful sympathy.

"you see," explained the youth, "i've been playing the goat--the giddy
goat. know what that means?"

"i used to," said leander; "i never touch alcoholic stimulants now,
myself."

"wish i didn't. i say, tweddle, have you been to the cosmopolitan
lately?"

"i don't go to music-'alls now," said leander; "i've give up all that
now i'm keeping company."

"well, you go and see the new ballet," the youth exhorted him earnestly;
not that he cared whether the hairdresser went or not, but because he
wanted to talk about the ballet to somebody.

"ah!" observed leander; "is that a good one they've got there now, sir?"

"rather think so. ballet called _olympus_. there's a regular ripping
little thing who comes on as one of venus's doves." and the youth went
on to intimate that the dove in question had shown signs of being struck
by his powers of fascination. "i saw directly that i'd mashed her; she
was gone, dead gone, sir; andi say, who's that in the corner over
there--eh?"

he was staring intently into the pier-glass in front of him. "that?"
said leander, following his glance. "oh! that's a statue i've bought.
she--she brightens up the place a bit, don't she?"

"a statue, is it? yes, of course; i knew it was a statue. well, about
that dove. i went round after it was all over, but couldn't see a sign
of her; sothat's a queer sort of statue you've got there!" he
broke off suddenly; and leander distinctly saw the goddess shake her arm
in fierce menace. "he's said something that's put her out," he
concluded. "i wish i knew what it was."

"it's a classical statue, sir," he said, with what composure he might;
"they're all made like that."

"are they, by jove? but, tweddle, i say, it _moves_: it's shaking its
fist like old harry!"

"oh, i think you're mistaken, sir, really! i don't perceive it myself."

"don't perceive it? but, hang it, man, look--look in the glass! there!
don't you see it does? dash it! can't you _say_ it does?"

"flaw in the mirror, sir; when you move your 'ed, you do ketch that
effect. i've observed it myself frequent. chin cut, sir? my fault--my
fault entirely," he admitted handsomely.

the young man was shaved by this time, and had risen to receive his hat
and cane, when he gave a violent start as he passed the aphrodite.
"there!" he said, breathlessly, "look at that, tweddle; she's going to
punch my head! i suppose you'll tell me _that's_ the glass?"

leander trembled--this time for his own reputation; for the report that
he kept a mysterious and pugnacious statue on the premises would not
increase his custom. he must silence it, if possible. "i'm afraid it is,
sir--in a way," he remarked, compassionately.

the young man turned paler still. "no!" he exclaimed. "you don't think
it is, though? don't you see anything yourself? i don't either, tweddle;
i was chaffing, that's all. i know i'm a wee bit off colour; but it's
not so bad as that. keep off! tell her to drop it, tweddle!"

for, as he spoke, the goddess had made a stride towards him. "miserable
one!" she cried, "you have mangled one of my birds. hence, or i crush
thee!"

"tweddle! tweddle!" cried the youth, taking refuge in the other shop,
"don't let her come after me! what's she talking about, eh? you
shouldn't have these things about; they're--they're not _right_!"

leander shut the glass door and placed himself before it, while he tried
to assume a concerned interest. "you take my advice, sir," he said; "you
go home and keep steady."

"is it that?" murmured the customer. "great scott! i must be bad!" and
he went out into the street, shaking.

"i don't believe i shall ever see _him_ again, either," thought leander.
"she'll drive 'em all away if she goes on like this." but here a sudden
recollection struck him, and he slapped his thigh with glee. "why, of
course," he said, "that's it. i've downright disgusted her; it was me
she was most put out with, and after this she'll leave me alone. hooray!
i'll shut up everything first and get rid of the boy, and then go in and
see her, and get away to matilda."

when the shop was secured for the night, he re-entered the saloon with a
light step. "well, mum," he began, "you've seen me at work, and you've
thought better of what you were proposing, haven't you now?"

"where is the wretched stripling who dared to slay my dove?" she cried.
"bring him to me!"

"what _are_ you a-talking about now?" cried the bewildered leander.
"who's been touching your birds? i wasn't aware you _kept_ birds."

"many birds are sacred to me--the silver swan, the fearless sparrow,
and, chief of all, the coral-footed dove. and one of these has that
monster slain--his own mouth hath spoken it."

"oh! is that all?" said leander. "why, he wasn't talking about a real
dove; it was a ballet girl he meant. i can't explain the difference; but
they _are_ different. and it's all talk, too. i know him; _he's_
harmless enough. and now, mum, to come to the point; you've now had the
opportunity of forming some ideer of my calling. you've thought better
of it, haven't you?"

"better! ay, far better!" she cried, in a voice that thrilled with
pride. "leander, too modestly you have rated yourself, for surely you
are great amongst the sons of men."

"_me!_" he gasped, utterly overcome. "how do you make that out?"

"do you not compel them to furnish sport for you? have i not seen them
come in, talking boldly and loud, and yet seat themselves submissively
at a sign from you? and do you not swathe them in the garb of
humiliation, and daub their countenances with whiteness, and threaten
their bared throats with the gleaming knife, and grind their heads under
the resistless wheel? then, having in disdain granted them their
worthless lives, you set them free; and they propitiate you with a gift,
and depart trembling."

"well, of all the topsy-turvy contrariness!" he protested. "you've got
it _all_ wrong; i declare you have! but i'll put you right, if it's
possible to do it." and he launched into a lengthy explanation of the
wonders she had seen, at the end of which he inquired, "_now_ do you
understand i'm nobody in particular?"

"it may be so," she admitted; "but what of that? ere this have i been
wild with love for a herdsman on phrygian hills. aye, adonis have i
kissed in the oakwood, and bewailed his loss. and did not selene
descend to woo the neatherd endymion? wherefore, then, should i scorn
thee? and what are the differences and degrees of mortals to such as i!
be bold; distrust your merits no longer, since i, who amongst the
goddesses obtained the prize of beauty, have chosen you for my own."

"i don't care what prizes you won," he said, sulkily; "i'm not yours,
and i don't intend to be, either." he was watching the clock impatiently
all the while, for it was growing very near nine.

"it is vain to struggle," she said, "since not the gods themselves can
resist fate. we must yield, and contend not."

"you begin it, then," he said. "give me my ring."

"the sole symbol of my power! the charm which has called me from my long
sleep! never!"

"then," said leander, knowing full well that his threat was an
impossible one, "i shall place the matter in the hands of a respectable
lawyer."

"i understand you not; but it is no matter. in time i shall prevail."

"well, mum, you must come again another evening, if you've no
objection," said leander, rudely, "because i've got to go out just now."

"i will accompany you," she said.

leander nearly danced with frenzy. take the statue with him to meet his
dear matilda! he dared not. "you're very kind," he stammered, perspiring
freely; "but i couldn't think of taking you out such a foggy evening."

"have no cares for me," she answered; "we will go together. you shall
explain to me the ways of this changed world."

"catch _me_!" was leander's elliptical comment to himself; but he had
to pretend a delighted acquiescence. "well," he cried, "if i hadn't been
thinking how lonely it would be going out alone! and now i shall have
the honour of your company, mum. you wait a bit here, while i run
upstairs and fetch my 'at."

but the perfidious man only waited until he was on the other side of the
door, which led from the saloon to his staircase, to lock it after him,
and slip out by the private door into the street.

"now, my lady," he thought triumphantly, "you're safe for awhile, at all
events. i've put up the shutters, and so you won't get out that way. and
now for tillie!"

two are company

vi.

"the shape
which has made escape,
and before my countenance
answers me glance for glance."

_mesmerism._

leander hastened eagerly to his trysting-place. all these obstacles and
difficulties had rendered his matilda tenfold dearer and more precious
to him; and besides, it was more than a fortnight since he had last seen
her. but he was troubled and anxious still at the recollection of the
greek statue shut up in his hair-cutting saloon. what would matilda say
if she knew about it; and still worse, what might it not do if it knew
about her? matilda might decline to continue his acquaintance--for she
was a very right-minded girl--unless venus, like the jealous and
vindictive heathen she had shown herself to be, were to crush her before
she even had the opportunity.

"it's a mess," he thought disconsolately, "whatever way i look at it.
but after to-night i won't meet matilda any more while i've got that
statue staying with me, or no one could tell the consequences." however,
when he drew near the appointed spot, and saw the slender form which
awaited him there by the railings, he forgot all but the present joy.
even the memory of the terrible divinity could not live in the wholesome
presence of the girl he had the sense to truly and honestly love.

matilda collum was straight and slim, though not tall; she had a neat
little head of light brown hair, which curled round her temples in soft
rings; her complexion was healthily pale, with the slightest tinge of
delicate pink in it; she had a round but decided chin, and her grey eyes
were large and innocently severe, except on the rare occasions when she
laughed, and then their expression was almost childlike in its gaiety.

generally, and especially in business hours, her pretty face was calm
and slightly haughty, and rash male customers who attempted to make the
choice of a "button-hole" an excuse for flirtation were not encouraged
to persevere. she was seldom demonstrative to leander--it was not her
way--but she accepted his effusive affection very contentedly, and,
indeed, returned it more heartily than her principles allowed her to
admit; for she secretly admired his spirit and fluency, and, as is often
the case in her class of life, had no idea that she was essentially her
lover's superior.

after the first greetings, they walked slowly round the square together,
his arm around her waist. neither said very much for some minutes, but
leander was wildly, foolishly happy, and there was no severity in
matilda's eyes when they shone in the lamp-light.

"well," he said, at last, "and so i've actually got you safe back again,
my dear, darling tillie! it seems like a long eternity since last we
met. i've been so beastly miserable, matilda!"

"you do seem to have got thinner in the face, leander dear," said
matilda, compassionately. "what _have_ you been doing while i've been
away?"

"only wishing my dearest girl back, that's all _i've_ been doing."

"what! haven't you given yourself any enjoyment at all--not gone out
anywhere all the time?"

"not once--leastwise, that is to say" a guilty memory of rosherwich
made him bungle here.

"why, of course i didn't expect you to stop indoors all the time," said
matilda, noticing the amendment, "so long as you never went where you
wouldn't take me."

oh, conscience, conscience! but rosherwich didn't count--it was outside
the radius; and besides, he _hadn't_ enjoyed himself.

"well," he said, "i did go out one evening, to hear a lecture on
astronomy at the town hall, in the gray's inn road; but then i had the
ticket given me by a customer, and i reely was surprised to find how
regular the stars was in their habits, comets and all. but my 'tilda is
the only star of the evening for me, to-night. i don't want to talk
about anything else."

the diversion was successful, and matilda asked no more inconvenient
questions. presently she happened to cough slightly, and he touched
accusingly the light summer cloak she was wearing.

"you're not dressed warm enough for a night like this," he said, with a
lover's concern. "haven't you got anything thicker to put on than that?"

"i haven't bought my winter things yet," said matilda; "it was so mild,
that i thought i'd wait till i could afford it better. but i've chosen
the very thing i mean to buy. you know mrs. twilling's, at the top of
the row, the corner shop? well, in the window there's a perfectly lovely
long cloak, all lined with squirrel's fur, and with those nice oxidized
silver fastenings. a cloak like that lasts ever so long, and will always
look neat and quiet; and any one can wear it without being stared
after; so i mean to buy it as soon as it turns really cold."

"ah!" said he, "i can't have you ketching cold, you know; it ain't
summer any longer, and i--i've been thinking we must give up our evening
strolls together for the present."

"when you've just been saying how miserable you've been without them.
oh, leander!"

"without _you_," he amended lamely. "i shall see you at aunt's, of
course; only we'd better suspend the walks while the nights are so raw.
and, oh, tillie, ere long you will be mine, my little wife! only to
think of you keeping the books for me with your own pretty little
fingers, and sending out the bills! (not that i give much credit). ah,
what a blissful dream it sounds! does it to you, matilda?"

"i'm not sure that you keep your books the same way as we do," she
replied demurely; "but i dare say"--(and this was a great concession for
matilda)--"i dare say we shall suit one another."

"suit one another!" he cried. "ah! we shall be inseparable as a brush
and comb, tillie, if you'll excuse so puffessional a stimulus. and what
a future lies before me! if i can only succeed in introducing some of my
inventions to public notice, we may rise, tilly, 'like an exclamation,'
as the poet says. i believe my new nasal splint has only to be known to
become universally worn; and i've been thinking out a little machine
lately for imparting a patrician arch to the flattest foot, that ought
to have an extensive run. i almost wish you weren't so pretty, tillie.
i've studied you careful, and i'm bound to say, as it is there really
isn't room for any improvement i could suggest. nature's beaten me
there, and i'm not too proud to own it."

"would you rather there _was_ room!" inquired matilda.

"from a puffessional point of view, it would have inspired me," he said.
"it would have suggested ideers, and i shouldn't have loved you less,
not if you hadn't had a tooth in your mouth nor a hair on your head; you
would still be my beautiful tillie."

"i would rather be as i am, thank you," said matilda, to whom this fancy
sketch did not appeal. "and now, let's talk about something else. do you
know that mamma is coming up to town at the end of the week on purpose
to see you?"

"no," said leander, "i--i didn't."

"yes, she's taken the whole of your aunt's first floor for a week. (you
know, she knew miss tweddle when she was younger, and that was how i
came to lodge there, and to meet you.) do you remember that sunday
afternoon you came to tea, and your aunt invited me in, because she
thought i must be feeling so dull, all alone?"

"ah, i should think i did! do you remember i helped to toast the
crumpets? what a halcyon evening that was, matilda!"

"was it?" she said. "i don't remember the weather exactly; but it was
nice indoors."

"but, i say, tillie, my own," he said, somewhat anxiously, "how does
your ma like your being engaged to me?"

"well, i don't think she does like it quite," said matilda. "she says
she will reserve her consent till she sees whether you are worthy; but
directly she sees you, leander, her objections will vanish."

"she has got objections, then? what to?"

"mother always wanted me to keep my affections out of trade," said
matilda. "you see, she never can forget what poor papa was."

"and what was your poor papa?" asked leander.

"didn't you know? he was a dentist, and that makes mamma so very
particular, you see."

"but, hang it, matilda! you're employed in a flower-shop, you know."

"yes, but mamma never really approved of it; only she had to give way
because she couldn't afford to keep me at home, and i scorned to go out
as a governess. never mind, leander; when she comes to know you and hear
your conversation, she will relent; her pride will melt."

"but suppose it keeps solid; what will you do, matilda?"

"i am independent, leander; and though i would prefer to marry with
mamma's approval, i shouldn't feel bound to wait for it. so long as you
are all i think you are, i shouldn't allow any one to dictate to me."

"bless you for those words, my angelic girl!" he said, and hugged her
close to his breast. "now i can beard your ma with a light 'art. oh,
matilda! you can form no ideer how i worship you. nothing shall ever
come betwixt us two, shall it?"

"nothing, as far as i am concerned, leander," she replied. "what's the
matter?"

he had given a furtive glance behind him after the last remarks, and his
embrace suddenly relaxed, until his arm was withdrawn altogether.

"nothing is the matter, matilda," he said. "doesn't the moon look red
through the fog?"

"is that why you took away your arm?" she inquired.

"yes--that is, no. it occurred to me i was rendering you too
conspicuous; we don't want to go about advertising ourselves, you know."

"but who is there here to notice?" asked matilda.

"nobody," he said; "oh, nobody! but we mustn't get into the _way_ of
it;" and he cast another furtive rearward look. in the full flow of his
raptures the miserable hairdresser had seen a sight which had frozen his
very marrow--a tall form, in flowing drapery, gliding up behind with a
tigress-like stealth. the statue had broken out, in spite of all his
precautions! venus, jealous and exacting, was near enough to overhear
every word, and he could scarcely hope she had escaped seeing the arm he
had thrown round matilda's waist.

"you were going to tell me how you worshipped me," said matilda.

"i didn't say _worship_," he protested; "it--it's only images and such
that expect that. but i can tell you there's very few brothers feel to
you as i feel."

"_brothers_, leander!" exclaimed matilda, and walked farther apart from
him.

"yes," he said. "after all, what tie's closer than a brother? a uncle's
all very well, and similarly a cousin; but they can't feel like a
brother does, for brothers they are not."

"i should have thought there were ties still closer," said matilda; "you
seemed to think so too, once."

"oh, ah! _that_!" he said. (every frigid word gave him a pang to utter;
but it was all for matilda's sake.) "there's time enough to think of
that, my girl; we mustn't be in a hurry."

"i'm _not_ in a hurry," said matilda.

"that's the proper way to look at it," said he; "and meanwhile i haven't
got a sister i'm fonder of than i am of you."

"if you've nothing more to say than that, we had better part," she
remarked; and he caught at the suggestion with obvious relief. he had
been in an agony of terror, lest, even in the gathering fog, she should
detect that they were watched; and then, too, it was better to part with
her under a temporary misconception than part with her altogether.

"well," he said, "i mustn't keep you out any longer, with that cold."

"you are very ready to get rid of me," said poor matilda.

"the real truth is," he answered, simulating a yawn with a heavy heart;
"i am most uncommon sleepy to-night, and all this standing about is too
much for me. so good-bye, and take care of yourself!"

"i needn't say that to you," she said; "but i won't keep you up a minute
longer. i wonder you troubled to come out at all."

"oh," he said, carefully keeping as much in front of the statue as he
could, "it's no trouble; but you'll excuse me seeing you to the door
this evening?"

"oh, certainly," said matilda, biting her lip. she touched his hand with
the ends of her fingers, and hurried away without turning her head.

when she was out of sight, leander faced round to the irrepressible
goddess. he was in a white rage; but terror and caution made him
suppress it to some extent.

"so here you are again!" he said.

"why did you not wait for me?" she answered. "i remained long for you;
you came not, and i followed."

"i see you did," said the aggrieved leander; "i can't say i like being
spied upon. if you're a goddess, act as such!"

"what! you dare to upbraid me?" she cried. "beware, or i"

"i know," said leander, flinching from her. "don't do that; i only made
a remark."

"i have the right to follow you; i choose to do so."

"if you must, you must," he groaned; "but it does seem hard that i
mayn't slip out for a few minutes' talk with my only sister."

"you said you were going to run for business, and you told me you had
three sisters."

"so i have; but only one _youngest_ one."

"and why did they not all come to talk with you?"

"i suppose because the other two stayed at home," rejoined leander,
sulkily.

"i know not why, but i doubt you; that one who came, she is not like
you!"

"no," said leander, with a great show of candour, "that's what every one
says; all our family are like that; we are like in a way, because we're
all of us so different. you can tell us anywhere just by the difference.
my father and mother were both very unlike: i suppose we take after
them."

the goddess seemed satisfied with this explanation. "and now that i have
regained you, let us return to your abode," she said; and leander walked
back by her side, a prey to rage and humiliation.

"it is a miserable thing," he was thinking, "for a man in my rank of
life to have a female statue trotting after him like a great dorg. i'm
dd if i put up with it! suppose we happen on somebody as knows me!"

fortunately, at that time of night bloomsbury square is not much
frequented; the increasing fog prevented the apparition of a female in
classical garments from attracting the notice to which it might
otherwise have been exposed, and they reached the shop without any
disagreeable encounter.

"she shan't stop in the saloon," he determined; "i've had enough of
that! if you've no objections," he said, with a mixture of deference and
dictation, "i shall be obliged if you'd settle yourself in the little
shrine in the upstairs room before proceeding to evaporate out of your
statue; it would be more agreeable to my feelings."

"ah!" she said, smiling, "you would have me nearer you? your stubborn
heart is yielding; a little while, and you will own the power of
aphrodite!"

"now, don't you go deceiving yourself with any such ideers," said the
hairdresser, irritably. "i shan't do no such thing, so you needn't think
it. and, to come to the point, how long do you mean to carry on this
little game?"

"game?" repeated the goddess, absently.

"how long are you going to foller me about in this ridiclous way?"

"till you submit, and profess your willingness to redeem your promise."

"oh, and you're coming every evening till then, are you?"

"at nightfall of each day i have power to revisit you."

"well, come then!" he said, with a fling of impatient anger. "i tell you
beforehand that you won't get anything by it. not if you was to come and
bring a whole stonemason's yard of sculptures along with you, you
wouldn't! you ought to know better than to come pestering a respectable
tradesman in this bold-faced manner!"

she smiled with a languid contemptuous tolerance, which maddened
leander.

"rave on," she said. "truly, you are a sorry prize for such as i to
stoop to win; yet i will it, nor shall you escape me. there will come a
day when, forsaken by all you hold dear on earth, despised, ruined,
distracted, you will pray eagerly for the haven of refuge to which i
alone can guide you. take heed, lest your conduct now be remembered
then! i have spoken."

they were indeed her last words that evening, and they impressed the
hairdresser, in spite of himself. custom habituates the mind to any
marvel, and already he had overcome his first horror at the periodical
awakenings of the statue, and surprise was swallowed up by exasperation;
now, however, he quailed under her dark threats. could it ever really
come to pass that he would sue to this stone to hide him in the realms
of the supernatural?

"i know this," he told himself, "if it once gets about that there's a
hairdresser to be seen in bloomsbury chivied about after dark by a
classical statue, i shan't dare to show my face. yet i don't know how
i'm to prevent her coming out after me, at all events now and then. if
she was only a little more like other people, i shouldn't mind so much;
but it's more than i can bear to have to go about with a _tablow vivant_
or a _pose plastique_ on my arm!"

all at once he started to his feet. "i've got it!" he cried, and went
downstairs to his laboratory, to reappear with some camel-hair brushes,
grease-paints, and a selection from his less important discoveries in
the science of cosmetics; namely, an "eyebrow accentuator," a vase of
"tweddle's cream of carnations" and "blondinette bloom," a china box of
"conserve of coral" for the lips, and one of his most expensive
_chevelures_.

he was trembling as he arranged them upon his table; not that he was
aware of the enormity of the act he contemplated, but he was afraid the
goddess might revisit the marble while he was engaged upon it.

he furnished the blank eye-sockets with a pair of eyes, which, if not
exactly artistic, at least supplied a want; he pencilled the eyebrows,
laid on several coats of the "bloom," which he suffused cunningly with a
tinge of carnation, and stained the pouting lips with his "conserve of
coral."

so far, perhaps, he had not violated the canons of art, and may even
have restored to the image something of its pristine hues; but his next
addition was one the vandalism of which admits of no possible defence,
and when he deftly fitted the coiffure of light closely-curled hair upon
the noble classical head, even leander felt dimly that something was
wrong!

"i don't know how it is," he pondered; "she looks more natural, but not
half so respectable. however, when she's got something on to cover the
marble, there won't be anything much to notice about her. i'll buy a
cloak for her the first thing to-morrow morning. matilda was saying
something about a shop near here where i could get that. and then, if
this venus must come following me about, she'll look less outlandish at
any rate, and that's something!"

a further predicament

vii.

"so long as the world contains us both,
me the loving and you the loth,
while the one eludes, must the other pursue."

_browning._

immediately after breakfast the next day, leander went out and paid a
visit to miss twilling's, bringing away with him a hooded cloak of the
precise kind he remembered matilda to have described as unlikely to
render its owner conspicuous. with this garment he succeeded in
disguising the statue to such a degree, that it was far less likely than
before that the goddess's appearance in public would excite any
particular curiosity--a result which somewhat relieved his anxiety as to
her future proceedings.

but all that day his thoughts were busy with matilda. he must, he
feared, have deeply offended her by his abrupt change on the previous
night; and now he could not expect to meet her again for days, and would
not know how to explain his conduct if he did meet her.

if he could only dare to tell her everything; but from such a course he
shrank. matilda would not only be extremely indignant (though, in very
truth, he had done nothing positively wrong as yet), but, with her
strict notions and well-regulated principles, she would assuredly
recoil from a lover who had brought himself into a predicament so
hideous. he would tell her all when, or if, he succeeded in extricating
himself.

but he was to learn the nature of matilda's sentiments sooner than he
expected. it was growing dusk, and he was unpacking a parcel of goods in
his front shop--for his saloon happened to be empty just then--when the
outer door swung back, and a slight girlish figure entered, after a
pause of indecision on the threshold. it was matilda.

had she come to break it off--to reproach him? he was prepared for no
less; she had never paid him a visit like this alone before; and some
doubts of the propriety of the thing seemed to be troubling her now, for
she did not speak.

"matilda," he faltered, "don't tell me you have come in a spirit of
unpleasantness, for i can't bear it."

"don't you deserve that i should?" she said, but not angrily. "you know,
you were very strange in behaving as you did last night. i couldn't tell
what to make of it."

"i know," he said confusedly; "it was something come over me, all of a
sudden like. i can't understand what made me like that; but, oh, tillie,
my dearest love, my 'art was busting with adoration all the time! the
circumstances was highly peculiar; but i don't know that i could explain
them."

"you needn't, leander; i have found you out." she said this with a
strange significance.

"what!" he almost shrieked. "you don't mean it, matilda! tell me, quick!
has the discovery changed your feelings towards me? has it?"

"yes," she said softly. "i--i think it has; but you ought not to have
done it, leander."

"i know," he groaned. "i was a fool, tillie; a fool! but i may get out
of it yet," he added. "i can get her to let me off. i must--i will!"

matilda opened her eyes. "but, leander dear, listen; don't be so hasty.
i never said i _wanted_ her to let you off, did i?"

he looked at her in a dazed manner. "i rather thought," he said slowly,
"that it might have put you out a little. i see i was mistook."

"you might have known that i should be more pleased than angry, i should
think," said matilda.

"more pleased thani might have known!" exclaimed the bewildered man.
"oh, you can't reely be taking it as cool as this! will you kindly
inform me _what_ it is you're alludin' to in this way?"

"what is the use of pretending? you know i know. and it _is_ colder,
much colder, this morning. i felt it directly i got up."

"quite a change in the weather, i'm sure," he said mechanically; "it
feels like a frost coming on." ("has matilda looked in to tell me the
weather's changed?" he was wondering within himself. "either i'm mad, or
matilda is.")

"you dear old goose!" said matilda, with an unusual effusiveness; "you
shan't tease me like this! do you think i've no eyes and no feelings?
any girl, i don't care how proud or offended, would come round on such
proof of devotedness as i've had this evening. when i saw it gone, i
felt i must come straight in and thank you, and tell you i shouldn't
think any more of last night. i couldn't stop myself."

"when you saw _what_ gone?" cried the hairdresser, rubbing up his hair.

"the cloak," said matilda; and then, as she saw his expression, her own
changed. "leander tweddle," she asked, in a dry hard voice, "have i been
making a wretched fool of myself? _didn't_ you buy that cloak?"

he understood at last. he had gone to miss twilling's chiefly because he
was in a hurry and it was close by, and he knew nowhere else where he
could be sure of getting what he required. now, by some supreme stroke
of the ill-luck which seemed to be pursuing him of late, he had
unwittingly purchased the identical garment on which matilda had fixed
her affections! how was he to notice that they took it out of the window
for him?

all this flashed across him as he replied, "yes, yes, tillie, i did buy
a cloak there; but are you sure it was the same you told me about?"

"do you think a woman doesn't know the look of a thing like that, when
it's taken her fancy?" said matilda. "why, i could tell you every clasp
and tassel on that cloak; it wasn't one you'd see every day, and i knew
it was gone the moment i passed the window. it quite upset me, for i'd
set my heart on it so; and i ran in to miss twilling, and asked her what
had become of it; and when she said she'd sold it that morning, i
thought i should have fainted. you see, it never struck me that it could
be you; for how could i dream that you'd be clever enough to go and
choose the very one? leander, it _was_ clever of you!"

"yes," he said, with a bitter rail against himself. "i'm a clever chap,
i am! but how did you find out?"

"oh, i made miss twilling (i often get little things there), i made her
describe who she sold it to, and she said she thought it was to a
gentleman in the hair-cutting persuasion who lived near; and then, of
course, i guessed who bought it."

"tillie," gasped leander, "i--i didn't _mean_ you to guess; the purpose
for which i require that cloak is my secret."

"oh, you silly man, when i've guessed it! and i take it just as kind of
you as if it was to be all a surprise. i was wishing as i came along i
could afford to buy it at once, it struck so cold coming out of our
place; and you had actually bought it for me all the time! thank you
ever so much, leander dear!"

he had only to accept the position; and he did. "i'm glad you're
pleased," he said; "i intended it as a surprise."

"and i am surprised," said matilda; "because, do you know, last night,
when i went home, i was feeling very cross with you. i kept thinking
that perhaps you didn't care for me any more, and were trying to break
it off; and, oh, all sorts of horrid things i kept thinking! and aunt
gave me a message for you this morning, and i was so out of temper i
wouldn't leave it. and now to find you've been so kind!"

she stretched out her hand to him across the counter, and he took and
held it tight; he had never seen her looking sweeter, nor felt that she
was half so dear to him. after all, his blunder had brought them
together again, and he was grateful to it.

at last matilda said, "you were quite right about this wrapper, leander;
it's not half warm enough for a night like this. i'm really afraid to go
home in it."

he knew well enough what she intended him to do; but just then he dared
not appear to understand. "it isn't far, only to millman street," he
said; "and you must walk fast, tillie. i wish i could leave the shop and
come too."

"you want me to ask you downright," she said pouting. "you men can't
even be kind prettily. don't you want to see how i look in your cloak,
leander?"

what could he say after that? he must run upstairs, deprive the goddess
of her mantle, and hand it over to matilda. she had evidently made up
her mind to have that particular cloak, and he must buy the statue
another. it would be expensive; but there was no help for it.

"certainly," he said, "you shall have it now, dearest, if you'd like to.
i'll run up and fetch it down, if you'll wait."

he rushed upstairs, two steps at a time, and, flinging open the door of
a cupboard, began desperately to uncloak his aphrodite. she was lifeless
still, which he considered fortunate.

but the goddess seemed to have a natural propensity to retain any form
of portable property. one of her arms was so placed that, tug and
stretch as he would, leander could not get the cloak from her shoulders,
and his efforts only broke one of the oxidized silver fastenings, and
tore part of the squirrel's-fur lining.

it was useless, and with a damp forehead he came down again to his
expectant _fiancée_.

"why, you haven't got it, after all!" she cried, her face falling.

"tillie, my own dear girl," he said, "i'm uncommon sorry, upon my soul i
am, but you can't have that cloak this evening."

"but why, leander, why?"

"because one of the clasps is broke. it must be sent back to be
repaired."

"i don't mind that. let me have it just as it is."

"and the lining's torn. no, matilda, i shan't make you a present of a
damaged article. i shall send it back. they must change it for me."
("then," he thought, "i can buy my matilda another.")

"i don't care for any other but that," she said; "and you can't match
it."

"oh, lor!" he thought, "and she knows every inch of it. the goddess must
give it up; it'll be all the same to _her_. very well then, dearest, you
_shall_ have that, but not till it's done up. i must have my way in
this; and as soon as ever i can, i'll bring it round."

"leander, could you bring it me by sunday," she said eagerly, "when you
come?"

"why sunday?" he asked.

"because--oh, that was the message your aunt asked me to bring you; it
was in a note, but i've lost it. she told me what was inside though, and
it's this. will you give her the pleasure of your company at her mid-day
dinner at two o'clock, to be introduced to mamma? and she said you were
to be sure and not forget her ring."

he tottered for a moment. the ring! yes, there was that to be got off,
too, besides the cloak.

"haven't you got the ring from vidler's yet?" she said. "he's had it
such a time."

he had told her where he had left it for alterations. "yes," he said,
"he has had it a time. it's disgraceful the way that old vidler potters
and potters. i shall go round and 'urry him up. i won't stand it any
longer."

here a customer came in, and matilda slipped away with a hurried
good-bye.

"i've got till sunday to get straight," the hairdresser thought, as he
attended on the new comer, "the best part of a week; surely i can talk
that venus over by that time."

when he was alone he went up to see her, without losing a moment. he
must have left the door unlocked in his haste, for she was standing
before the low chimney-glass, regarding herself intently. as he came in
she turned.

"who has done all this?" she demanded. "tell me, was it you?"

"i did take the liberty, mum," he faltered guiltily.

"you have done well," she said graciously. "with reverent and loving
care have you imparted hues as of life to these cheeks, and decked my
image in robes of costly skins."

"don't name it, mum," he said.

"but what are these?" she continued, raising a hand to the light
ringlets on her brow. "i like them not--they are unseemly. the waving
lines, parted by the bold chisel of a grecian sculptor, resemble my
ambrosial tresses more nearly than this abomination."

"you may go all over london," said leander, "and you won't find a
coiffure, though i say it, to set closer and defy detection more
naturally than the one you've got on; selected from the best imported
foreign hair in the market, i do assure you."

"i accept the offering for the spirit in which it was presented, though
i approve it not otherwise."

"you'll find it wear very comfortable," said leander; "but that cloak,
now i come to see it on, it reely is most unworthy of you, a very
inferior piece of goods, and, if you'll allow me, i'll change it," and
he gently extended his hand to draw it off.

"touch it not," said the goddess; "for, having once been placed upon my
effigy, it is consecrated to my service."

"for mercy's sake, let me get another one--one with more style about
it," he entreated; "my credit hangs on it!"

"i am content," she said, "more than content. no more words--i retain
it. and you have pleased me by this conduct, my hairdresser. unknown it
may be, even to yourself, your heart is warming in the sunshine of my
favour; you are coy and wayward, but you are yielding. though pent in
this form, carved by a mortal hand, i shall prevail in the end. i shall
have you for my own."

he rumpled his hair wildly, "'orrid obstinate these goddesses are," he
thought. "what am i to say to matilda now? if i could only find a way of
getting this statue shut up somewhere where she couldn't come and bother
me, i'd take my chance of the rest. i can't go on with this sort of
thing every evening. i'm sick and tired of it."

then something occurred to him. "could i delude her into it?" he asked
himself. "she's soft enough in some things, and, for all she's a
goddess, she don't seem up to our london ways yet. i'll have a try,
anyway."

so he began: "didn't i understand you to observe, mum, some time back,
that the pidgings and sparrers were your birds?"

"they are mine," she said--"or they were mine in days that are past."

"well," he said, "there's a place close by, with railings in front of
it, and steps and pillars as you go in, and if you like to go and look
in the yard there you'll find pidgings enough to set you up again. i
shouldn't wonder if they've been keeping them for you all this time."

"they shall not lose by it," she said. "go thither, and bring me my
birds."

"i think," he said, "it would be better if you'd go yourself; they don't
know me at the british museum. but if you was to go to the beadle at the
lodge and demand them, i've no doubt you'd be attended to; and you'll
see some parties at the gates in long coats and black cloth 'elmets,
which if you ask them to ketch you a few sparrers, they'll probably be
most happy to oblige."

"my beloved birds!" she said. "i have been absent from them so long.
yes, i will go. tell me where."

he got his hat, and went with her to a corner of bloomsbury square, from
which they could see the railings fronting the museum in the
steel-tinted haze of electric light.

"that's the place," he said. "keeps its own moonshine, you see. go
straight in, and tell 'em you're come to fetch your doves."

"i will do so," she said, and strode off in imperious majesty.

he looked after her with an irrepressible chuckle.

"if she ain't locked up soon, i don't know myself," he said, and went
back to his establishment.

he had only just dismissed his apprentice and secured the shop for the
night, when he heard the well-known tread up the staircase. "back again!
i don't have any luck," he muttered; and with reason, for the statue,
wearing an expression of cold displeasure, advanced into his room. he
felt a certain sense of guilt as he saw her.

"got the birds?" he inquired, with a nervous familiarity, "or couldn't
you bring yourself to ask for them?"

"you have misled me," she said. "my birds are not there. i came to gates
in front of a stately pile--doubtless erected to some god; at the
entrance stood a priest, burly and strong, with gold-embroidered
garments"

("the beadle, i suppose," commented leander.)

"i passed him unseen, and roamed unhindered over the courtyard. it was
bare, save for one or two worshippers who crossed it. presently a winged
thing fluttered down to my feet. but though a dove indeed, it was no
bird of mine--it knew me not. and it was draggled, begrimed, uncleanly,
as never were the doves of aphrodite. and the sparrows (for these, too,
did i see), they were worse. i motioned them from me with loathing. i
renounced them all. thus, leander, have i fared in following your
counsels!"

"well, it ain't my fault," he said; "it's the london soot makes them
like that. there's some at the guildhall: perhaps they're cleaner."

"no," she said, vehemently; "i will seek no further. this is a city of
darkness and mire. i am in a land, an age, which know me not: this much
have i learnt already. the world was fairer and brighter of old!"

"you see," said leander, "if you only go about at night, you can't
expect sunshine! but i'm told there's cleaner and brighter places to be
seen abroad--if you cared to go there?" he insinuated.

"to one place only, to my cyprian caves, will i go," she declared, "and
with you!"

"we'll talk about that some other time," he answered, soothingly. "lady
venus, look here, don't you think you've kept that ring long enough?
i've asked you civilly enough, goodness knows, to 'and it over, times
without number. i ask you once more to act fair. you know it came to you
quite accidental, and yet you want to take advantage of it like this. it
ain't right!"

she met this with her usual scornful smile. "listen, leander," she said.
"once before--how long since i know not--a mortal, in sport or accident,
placed his ring as you have done upon the finger of a statue erected to
me. i claimed fulfilment of the pledge then, as now; but a force i
could not withstand was invoked against me, and i was made to give up
the ring, and with it the power and rights i strove to exert. but i will
not again be thwarted: no force, no being shall snatch you from me; so
be not deceived. submit, ere you excite my fierce displeasure; submit
now, since in the end submit you must!"

there was a dreadful force in the sonorous tones which made him shiver;
a rigid inflexible will lurked in this form, with all its subtle curves
and feminine grace. if goddesses really retained any power in these
days, there could be no doubt that she would use hers to the full.

yet he still struggled. "i can't make you give up the ring," he said;
"but no more you can't make me leave my--my establishment, and go away
underground with you. i'm an englishman, i am, and englishmen are free,
mum; p'r'aps you wasn't aware of that? i've got a will of my own, and so
you'll find it!"

"poor worm!" she said pityingly (and the hairdresser hated to be
addressed as a poor worm), "why oppose thy weak will to mine? why enlist
my pride against thyself; for what hast thou of thine own to render thy
conquest desirable? thou art bent upon defiance, it seems. i leave thee
to reflect if such a combat can be equal. farewell; and at my next
coming let me find a change!"

and the spirit of the goddess fled, as before, to the mysterious realms
from which she had been so incautiously evoked, leaving leander almost
frantic with rage, superstitious terror, and baffled purposes.

"i must get the ring off," he muttered, "_and_ the cloak, somehow. oh!
if i could only find out howthere was that other chap--_he_ got off;
she said as much. if i could get out how he managed it, why couldn't i
do the same? but who's to tell me? she won't--not if she knows it! i
wonder if it's in any history. old freemoult would know it if it
was--he's such a scholar. why, he gave me a name for that 'airwash
without having to think twice over it! i'll try and pump old freemoult.
i'll do it to-morrow, too. i'll see if i'm to be domineered over by a
image out of a tea-garden. eh? i--i don't care if she _did_ hear me!"

so leander went to his troubled pillow, full of this new resolution,
which seemed to promise a way of escape.

between the devil and the deep sea

viii.

"some, when they take _revenge_, are desirous the party should know
whence it cometh: this is the more generous."--bacon.

in the tottenham court road was a certain commercial dining-room, where
leander occasionally took his evening meal, after the conclusion of his
day's work, and where mr. freemoult was accustomed to take his supper,
on leaving the british museum library.

to this eating-house leander repaired the very next evening, urged by a
consuming desire to learn the full particulars of the adventure which
his prototype in misfortune had met with.

it was an unpretending little place, with the bill of fare wafered to
the door, and red curtains in the windows, setting off a display of
joints, cauliflowers, and red herrings. he passed through into a long,
low room, with dark-brown grained walls, partitioned off in the usual
manner; and taking a seat in a box facing the door, he ordered dinner
from one of the shirtsleeved attendants.

the first glance had told him that the man he wished to see was not
there, but he knew he must come in before long; and, in fact, before
leander's food could be brought, the old scholar made his appearance.

he was hardly a man of attractive exterior, being of a yellow
complexion, with a stubbly chin, and lank iron-grey locks. he wore a
tall and superannuated hat with a staring nap, and the pockets of his
baggy coat bulged with documents. altogether he did not seem exactly the
person to be an authority on the subject of venus.

but, as the hairdresser was aware, he had the reputation of being a mine
of curious and out-of-the-way information, though few thought it worth
their while to work him. he gained a living, however, by hackwork of
various descriptions, and was in slightly better circumstances than he
allowed to appear.

as he passed slowly along the central passage, in his usual state of
abstraction, leander touched him eagerly on the sleeve. "come in 'ere,
mr. freemoult, sir," he said; "there's room in this box."

"it's the barber, is it?" said the old man. "what do you want me to eat
with you for, eh?"

"why, for the pleasure of your company, sir, of course," said leander,
politely.

"well," said the old gentleman, sitting down, while documents bristled
out of him in all directions, "there are not many who would say
that--not many now."

"don't you say so, mr. freemoult, sir. i'm sure it's a benefit, if only
for your conversation. i often say, 'i never meet mr. freemoult without
i learn somethink;' i do indeed."

"then we must have met less often than i had imagined."

"now, you're too modest, sir; you reelly are--a scholar like you, too!
talking of scholarship, you'll be gratified to hear that that title you
were good enough to suggest for the 'regenerator' is having a quite
surprising success. i disposed of five bottles over the counter only
yesterday." ("these old scholars," was his wily reflection, "like being
flattered up.")

"does that mean you've another beastly bottle you want me to stand
godfather to?" growled the ungrateful old gentleman.

"oh no, indeed, sir! it's onlybut p'r'aps you'll allow me previously
the honour of sending out for whatever beverage you was thinking of
washing down your boiled beef with, sir."

"do you know who i am?" mr. freemoult burst out. "i'm a scholar, and
gentleman enough still to drink at my own expense!"

"i intended no offence, i'm sure, sir; it was only meant in a friendly
way."

"that is the offence, sir; that _is_ the offence! but, there, we'll say
no more about it; you can't help your profession, and i can't help my
prejudices. what was it you wanted to ask me?"

"well," said leander, "i was desirous of getting some information
respecting--ahem--a party by the name of (if i've caught the foreign
pronounciation) haphrodite, otherwise known as venus. do you happen to
have heard tell of her?"

"have i had a classical education, sir, or haven't i? heard of her? of
course i have. but why, in the name of mythology, any hairdresser living
should trouble his head about aphrodite, passes my comprehension. leave
her alone, sir!"

"it's her who won't leave _me_ alone!" thought leander; but he did not
say so. "i've a very particular reason for wishing to know; and i'm sure
if you could tell me all you'd heard about her, i'd take it very kind of
you."

"want to pick my brains; well, you wouldn't be the first. but i am
here, sir, to rest my brain and refresh my body, not to deliver
peripatetic lectures to hairdressers on grecian mythology."

"well," said leander, "i never meant you to give your information
peripatetic; i'm willing to go as far as half a crown."

"confbut, there, what's the good of being angry with you? is this
the sort of thing you want for your half-crown?--aphrodite, a later form
of the assyrian astarte; the daughter, according to some theogonies, of
zeus and dione; others have it that she was the offspring of the foam of
the sea, which gathered round the fragments of the mutilated uranos"

"that don't seem so likely, do it, sir?" said leander.

"if you are going to crop in with idiotic remarks, i shall confine
myself to my supper."

"don't stop, mr. freemoult, sir; it's most instructive. i'm attending."

but the old gentleman, after a manner he had, was sunk in a dreamy
abstraction for the moment, in which he apparently lost the thread, as
he resumed, "whereupon zeus, to punish her, gave her in wedlock to his
deformed son, hephæstus."

"she never mentioned him to _me_," thought leander; "but i suppose she's
a widow goddess by this time; i'm sure i _hope_ so."

"whom," mr. freemoult was saying, "she deceived upon several occasions,
notably in the case of " and here he launched into a scandalous
chronicle, which determined leander more than ever that matilda must
never know he had entertained a personage with such a past.

"angered by her indiscretions, zeus inspired her with love for a mortal
man."

"poor devil!" said leander, involuntarily. "and what became of _him_,
sir?"

"there were several thus distinguished; amongst others, anchises,
adonis, and cinyras. of these, the first was struck by lightning; the
second slain by a wild boar; and the third is reputed to have perished
in a contest with apollo."

"they don't seem to have had no luck, any of them," was leander's
depressed conclusion.

"aphrodite, or venus, as you choose to call her, took a prominent part
in the trojan war, the origin of which ten years' struggle may be traced
to a certain golden apple."

"what an old rag-bag it is!" thought leander. "i'm only wasting money on
him. he's like a bran-pie at a fancy fair: what you get out of him is
always the thing you didn't want."

"no, no, mr. freemoult," he said, with some impatience; "leave out about
the war and the apple. it--it isn't either of them as i wanted to hear
about."

"then i have done," said the old man, curtly. "you've had considerably
more than half a crown's worth, as it is."

"look here, mr. freemoult," said the reckless hairdresser, "if you can't
give me no better value, i don't mind laying out another sixpence in
questions."

"put your questions, then, by all means; and i'll give you your fair
sixpenn'orth of answers. now, then, i'm ready for you. what's your
difficulty? out with it."

"why," said leander, in no small confusion, "isn't there a story
somewhere of a statue to venus as some young man (a long time back it
was, of course) was said to have put his ring on? and do you know the
rights of it? i--i can't remember how it ended, myself."

"wait a bit, sir; i think i do remember something of the legend you
refer to. you found it in the _earthly paradise_, i make no doubt?"

"i found it in rosherwich gardens," leander very nearly blurted out; but
he stopped himself, and said instead, "i don't think i've ever been
there, sir; not to remember it."

"well, well! you're no lover of poetry, that's very evident; but the
story is there. yes, yes; and burton has a version of it, too, in his
_anatomy_. how does it go? give my head a minute to clear, and i'll tell
you. ha! i have it! it was something like this: there was a certain
young gentleman of rome who, on his wedding-day, went out to play
tennis; and in the tennis-court was a brass statue of the goddess
venus"

("mine _ought_ to be brass, from her goings on," thought leander.)

"and while he played he took off his finger-ring and put it upon the
statue's hand; a mighty foolish act, as you will agree."

"ah!" said leander, shaking his head; "you may say that! what next,
sir?" he became excited to find that he really was on the right track at
last.

"why, when the game was over, and he came to get his ring, he found he
couldn't get it off again. ha! ha!" and the old man chuckled softly, and
then relapsed once more into silence.

"yes, yes, mr. freemoult, sir! i'm a-listening; it's very funny; only do
go on!"

"go on? where was i? hadn't i finished? ah, to be sure! well, so paris
gave _her_ the apple, you see."

"i didn't understand you to allude to no apple," said his puzzled
hearer; "and it was at rome, i thought, not paris. bring your mind more
to it, sir; we'd got to the ring not coming off the statue."

"i know, sir; i know. my mind's clear enough, let me tell you. that very
night (as i was about to say, if you'd had patience to hear me) venus
stepped in and parted the unfortunate pair"

"it was a apple just now, you aggravating old muddle 'ed!" said leander,
internally.

"venus informed the young man that he had betrothed himself to her by
that ring" ("same game exactly," thought the pupil), "and--and, in
short, she led him such a life for some nights, that he could bear it no
longer. so at length he repaired to a certain mighty magician
calledlet me see, what was his name again? it wasn't agrippa--was it
albertus? odd; it has escaped me for the moment."

"never mind, sir; call him jones."

"i will _not_ call him jones, sir! i had it on my tongue--there,
_palumbus_! palumbus it was. well, palumbus told him the goddess would
never cease to trouble him, unless he could get back the ring--unless he
could get back the ring."

leander's heart began to beat high; the solution of his difficulty was
at hand. it was something to know for certain that upon recovery of the
ring the goddess's power would be at an end. it only remained to find
out how the other young man managed it. "yes, mr. freemoult?" he said
interrogatively; for the old gentleman had run down again.

"i was only thinking it out. to resume, then. no sooner had the magician
(whose name as i said was apollonius) come to the wedding, than he
promptly conjectured the bride to be a serpent; whereupon she vanished
incontinently, after the manner of serpents, with the house and
furniture."

"haven't you missed out a lot, sir?" inquired leander, deferentially;
"because it don't seem to me to hook on quite. what became of venus and
the ring?"

"how the dickens am i to tell you, if you will interrupt? ring! _what_
ring? why, yes; the magician gave the young man a certain letter, and
told him to go to a particular cross-road outside the city, at dead of
night, and wait for saturn to pass by in procession, with his fallen
associates. this he did, and presented the magician's letter; which
saturn, after having read, called venus to him, who was riding in front,
and commanded her to deliver up the ring."

here he stopped, as if he had nothing to add.

"and did she, sir?" asked leander, breathlessly.

"did she what? give up the ring? of course she did. haven't i been
saying so? why not?"

"well," observed leander, "so that's how _he_ got out of it, was it?
hah! he was a lucky chap. those were the days when magicians did a good
trade, i suppose? should you say there were any such parties now, on the
quiet like, eh, sir?"

"bah! magic is a lost art, degraded to dark séances and juvenile
parties--the last magician dead for more than two hundred years. don't
expose your ignorance, sir, by any more such questions."

"no," said leander; "i thought as much. and so, if any one was to get
into such a fix nowadays--of course, that's only my talk, but if they
did--there ain't a practising magician anywhere to help him out of it.
that's your opinion, ain't it, sir?"

"as the danger of such a contingency is not immediate," was the reply,
"the want of a remedy need not, in my humble opinion, cause you any
grave uneasiness."

"no," agreed leander, dejectedly. "i don't care, of course. i was only
thinking that, in case--but there, it's no odds! well, mr. freemoult,
you've told me what i was curious to know, and here's your little
honnyrarium, sir--two shillings and two sixpences, making three
shillings in all, pre-cisely."

"keep your money, sir," said the old man, with contemptuous good humour.
"my working hours are done for the day, and you're welcome enough to any
instruction you're capable of receiving from my remarks. it's not saying
much, i dare say."

"oh, you told it very clear, considering, sir, i'm sure! i don't grudge
it."

"keep it, i tell you, and say no more about it."

so, expressing his thanks, leander left the place; and, when he was
outside, felt more keenly than ever the blow his hopes had sustained.

he knew the whole story of his predecessor in misfortune now, and, as a
precedent, it was worse than useless.

true, for an instant a wild idea had crossed his mind, of seeking some
lonely suburban cross-road at dead of night, just to see if anything
came of it. "the last time was several hundred years ago, it seems," he
told himself; "but there's no saying that satan mightn't come by, for
all that. here's venus persecuting as lively as ever, and i never heard
the devil was dead. i've a good mind to take the tram to the archway,
and walk out till i find a likely-looking place."

but, on reflection, he gave this up. "if he did come by, i couldn't
bring him a line--not even from the conjuror in high 'oborn--and satan
might make me put my hand to something binding, and i shouldn't be no
better off. no; i don't see no way of getting back my ring and poor
tillie's cloak, nor yet getting rid of that goddess, any more than
before. there's one comfort, i can't be any worse off than i am."

oppressed by these gloomy reflections, he returned to his home,
expecting a renewal of his nightly persecution from the goddess; but
from some cause, into which he was too grateful to care to inquire, the
statue that evening showed no sign of life in his presence, and after
waiting with the cupboard open for some time in suspense, he ventured to
make himself some coffee.

he had scarcely tasted it, however, before he heard, from the passage
below, a low whistle, followed by the peculiar stave by which a modern
low-life blondel endeavours to attract attention. the hairdresser paid
no attention, being used, as a londoner, to hearing such signals, and
not imagining they could be intended for his ear.

but presently a handful of gravel rattled against his window, and the
whistle was repeated. he went to the window cautiously, and looked out.
below were two individuals, rather carefully muffled; their faces, which
were only indistinctly seen, were upturned to him.

he retreated, trembling. he had had so much to think of lately, that the
legal danger he was running, by harbouring the detested statue, was
almost forgotten; but now he remembered the inspector's words, and his
legs bent beneath him. could these people be _detectives_?

"is that mr. tweddle up there?" said a voice below--"because if it is,
he'd better come down, double quick, and let us in, that's all!"

"'ere, don't you skulk up there!" added a coarser voice. "we know
y'er there; and if yer don't come down to us, why, we'll come up to
you!"

this brought leander forward again. "gentlemen," he said, leaning out,
and speaking in an agitated whisper, "for goodness' sake, what do you
want with me?"

"you let us in, and we'll tell you."

"will it do if i come down and speak to you outside?" said leander.

there was a consultation between the two at this, and at the end of it
the first man said: "it's all the same to us, where we have our little
confabulation. come down, and look sharp about it!"

leander came down, taking care to shut the street door behind him. "you
ain't the police?" he said, apprehensively.

they each took an arm, and walked him roughly off between them towards
queen square. "we'll show you who we are," they said.

"i--i demand your authority for this," gasped leander. "what am i
charged with?"

they had brought him into the gloomiest part of the square, where the
houses, used as offices in the daytime, were now dark and deserted. here
they jammed him up against the railings, and stood guard over him, while
he was alarmed to perceive a suppressed ferocity in the faces of both.

"what are you charged with? grr! for 'arf a pint i'd knock your
bloomin 'ed in!" said the coarser gentleman of the two--an evasive form
of answer which did not seem to promise a pleasant interview.

leander was not naturally courageous, and what he had gone through
lately had shaken his nerves. he thought that, for policemen, they
showed too strong a personal feeling; but who else could they be? he
could not remember having seen either of them before. one was a tall,
burly, heavy-jawed man; the other smaller and slighter, and apparently
the superior of the two in education and position.

"you don't remember me, i see," said the latter; and then suddenly
changing his tone to a foreign accent, he said: "haf you been since to
drink a glass of beer at your open-air gardens at rosherwich?"

leander knew him then. it was his foreign customer of monday evening.
his face was clean-shaven now, and his expression changed--not for the
better.

"i think," he said, faintly, "i had the privilege of cutting your 'air
the other evening."

"you did, my friend, and i admired your taste for the fine arts. this
gentleman and i have, on talking it over, been so struck by what i saw
that evening, that we ventured to call and inquire into it."

"look 'ere, count," said his companion, "there ain't time for all that
perliteness. you leave him to me; _i'll_ talk to him! now then, you
white-livered little airy-sneak, do you know who we are?"

"no," said leander; "and, excuse me calling of your attention to it, but
you're pinching my arm!"

"i'll pinch it off before i've done," said the burly man. "well, we're
the men that have planned and strived, and run all the risk, that you
and your gang might cut in and carry off our honest earnings. you
infernal little hair-cutting shrimp, you! to think of being beaten by
the likes of you! it's sickening, that's what it is, sickening!"

"i don't understand you--as i live, gentlemen, i don't understand you!"
pleaded leander.

"you understand us well enough," said the ex-foreigner, with an awful
imprecation on all leander's salient features; "but you shall have it
all in black and white. we're the party that invented and carried out
that little job at wricklesmarsh court."

"burglars! do you mean you're burglars?" cried the terrified leander.

"we started as burglars, but we've finished by being made cat's-paws
of--by you, curse you! you didn't think we should find you out, did you?
but if you wanted to keep us in the dark, you made two awkward little
slips: one was leaving your name and address at the gardens as the party
who was supposed to have last seen the statue, and the other was keeping
the said statue standing about in your hair-cutting room, to meet the
eye of any gentleman calling out of curiosity, and never expecting such
a find as that."

"what's the good of jawing at him, count? that won't satisfy me, it
won't. 'ere, i can't 'old myself off him any longer. i _must_ put a 'ed
on him."

but the other interposed. "patience, my good braddle. no violence. leave
him to me; he's a devilish deep fellow, and deserves all respect." (here
he shook leander like a rat.) "you've stolen a march on us, you
condemned little hairdressing ape, you! how did you do it? out with it!
how the devil did you do it?"

"for the love of heaven, gents," pleaded leander, without reflecting
that he might have found a stronger inducement, "don't use violence! how
did i do _what_?"

"count, i _can't_ answer for myself," said the man addressed as braddle.
"i shall send a bullet into him if you don't let me work it off with
fists; i know i shall!"

"keep quiet," said his superior, sternly. "don't you see _i'm_ quiet?"
and he twisted his knuckles viciously into leander's throat. "if you
call out you're a corpse!"

"i wasn't thinking of calling out, indeed i wasn't. i'm quite satisfied
with being where i am," said leander, "if you'd only leave me a little
more room to choke in, and tell me what i've done to put you both in
such tremenjous tempers."

"done? you cur, when yer know well enough you've taken the bread out of
our mouths--the bread we'd earned! d'ye suppose we left out that statue
in the gardens for the like of you? who put you up to it? how many were
there in it? what do you mean to do now you've got it? speak out, or i
swear i'll cut your heart out, and throw it over the railings for the
tom-cats; i will, you !"

the man called braddle, as he uttered this threat, looked so very
anxious to execute it, that leander gave himself up for lost.

"as true as i stand here, gentlemen, i didn't steal that statue."

"i doubt you're not the build for taking the lead in that sort of
thing," said the count; "but you were in it. you went down that saturday
as a blind. deny it if you dare."

leander did not dare. "i could not help myself, gentlemen," he faltered.

"who said you could? and you can't help yourself now, either; so make a
clean breast of it. who are you standing in with? is it potter's lot?"

if leander had declared himself to be alone, things might have gone
harder with him, and they certainly would never have believed him; so he
said it _was_ potter's lot.

"i told you potter was after that marble, and you wouldn't have it,
count," growled braddle. "now you're satisfied."

the count comprised potter and his lot in a new and original malediction
by way of answer, and then said to leander, "did potter tell you to let
that venus stand where all the world might see it?"

"i had no discretion," said the hairdresser. "i'm not responsible,
indeed, gents."

"no discretion! i should think you hadn't. nor potter either, acting the
dog in the manger like this. where'll _he_ find his market for it, eh?
what orders have you got? when are you going to get it across?"

"i've no notions. i haven't received no directions," said leander.

"a nice sort o' mug you are to be trusted with a job like this," said
braddle. "i did think potter was better up in his work, i did. a pretty
bungle he'll make of it!"

"it would serve him right, for interfering with fellow-professionals in
this infernal unprincipled manner. but he shan't have the chance,
braddle, he shan't have the chance; we'll steal a march on him this
time."

"is the coast clear yet?" said braddle.

"we must risk it. we shall find a route for it, never fear," was the
reply. "now, you cursed hairdresser, you listen to what i'm going to
tell you. that venus is our lawful property, and, by , we mean to
get her into our hands again. d'ye hear that?"

leander heard, and with delight. so long as he could once get free from
the presence of the statue, and out of the cross-fire of burglars and
police, he was willing by this time to abandon the cloak and ring.

"i can truly say, i hope you'll be successful, gents," he replied.

"we don't want your hopes, we want your help. you must round on
potter."

"must i, gents?" said leander. "well, to oblige you, whatever it costs
me, i _will_ round on potter."

"take care you stick to that," said braddle. "the next pint, count, is
'ow we're to get her."

"come in and take her away now," said leander, eagerly. "she'll be
quiet. i--i mean the _house_'ll be quiet now. you'll be very welcome, i
assure you. _i_ won't interfere."

"you're a bright chap to go in for a purfession like ours," said mr.
braddle, with intense disgust. "how do yer suppose we're to do it--take
her to pieces, eh, and bring her along in our pockets? do you think
we're flats enough to run the chance of being seen in the streets by a
copper, lugging that 'ere statue along?"

"we must have the light cart again, and a sack," said the count. "it's
too late to-night."

"and it ain't safe in the daytime," said braddle. "we're wanted for that
job at camberwell, that puts it on to-morrow evening. but suppose potter
has fixed the same time."

"here, _you_ know. has potter fixed the same time?" the count demanded
from leander.

"no," said leander; "potter ain't said nothing to me about moving her."

"then are you man enough to undertake potter, if he starts the idea?
_are_ you? come!"

"yes, gents, i'll manage potter. you break in any time after midnight,
and i engage you shall find the venus on the premises."

"but we want more than that of you, you know. we mustn't lose any time
over this job. you must be ready at the door to let us in, and bear a
hand with her down to the cart."

but this did not suit leander's views at all. he was determined to
avoid all personal risks; and to be caught helping the burglars to carry
off the aphrodite would be fatal.

he was recovering his presence of mind. as his tormentors had sensibly
relaxed, he was able to take steps for his own security.

"i beg pardon, gents," he said, "but i don't want to appear in this
myself. there's potter, you see; he's a hawful man to go against. you
know what potter is, yourselves." (potter was really coming in quite
usefully, he began to think.)

"well, i don't suppose potter would make more bones about slitting your
throat than we should, if he knew you'd played him false," said the
count. "but we can't help that; in a place like this it's too risky to
break in, when we can be let in."

"if you'll only excuse me taking an active part," said leander, "it's
all i ask. this is my plan, gentlemen. you see that little archway
there, where my finger points? well, that leads by a small alley to a
yard, back of my saloon. you can leave your cart here, and come round as
safe as you please. i'll have the winder in my saloon unfastened, and
put the statue where you can get her easy; but i don't want to be mixed
up in it further than that."

"that seems fair enough," said the count, "provided you keep to it."

"but suppose it's a plant?" growled braddle. "suppose he's planning to
lay a trap for us? suppose we get in, to find potter and his lot on the
look-out for us, or break into a house that's full of bloomin' coppers?"

"i did think of that; but i believe our friend knows that if he doesn't
act square with me, his life isn't worth a bent pin; and besides, he
can't warn the police without getting himself into more or less hot
water. so i think he'll see the wisdom of doing what he's told."

"i do," said leander, "i do, gentlemen. i'd sooner die than deceive
you."

"well," said the count, "you'd find it come to the same thing."

"no," added braddle. "if you blow the gaff on us, my bloomin', i'll saw
that pudden head of yours right off your shoulders, and swing for it,
cheerful!"

leander shuddered. amongst what desperate ruffians had his unlucky stars
led him! how would it all end, he wondered feebly--how?

"well, gentlemen," he said, with his teeth chattering, "if you don't
want me any more, i'll go in; and i'm to expect you to-morrow evening, i
believe?"

"expect us when you 'ear us," said braddle; "and if you make fools of us
again" and he described consequences which exceeded in
unpleasantness the worst that leander could have imagined.

the poor man tottered back to his room again, in a most unenviable frame
of mind; not even the prospect of being delivered from the goddess could
reconcile him to the price he must pay for it. he was going to take a
plunge into downright crime now; and if his friend the inspector came to
hear of it, ruin must follow. and, in any case, the cloak and the ring
would be gone beyond recovery, while these cut-throat housebreakers
would henceforth have a hold over him; they might insist upon steeping
him in blacker crime still, and he knew he would never have the courage
to resist.

as he thought of the new difficulties and dangers that compassed him
round about, he was frequently on the verge of tears, and his couch
that night was visited by dreadful dreams, in which he sought audience
of the evil one himself at cross-roads, was chased over half london by
police, and dragged over the other half by burglars, to be finally
flattened by the fall of aphrodite.

at last

ix.

"does not the stone rebuke me
for being more stone than it?"

_winter's tale._

"yet did he loath to see the image fair,
white and unchanged of face, unmoved of limb!"

_earthly paradise._

leander's hand was very tremulous all the next day, as several indignant
clients discovered, and he closed as early as he could, feeling it
impossible to attend to business under the circumstances.

about seven o'clock he went up to his sitting-room. a difficult and
ungrateful task was before him. to facilitate her removal, he must
persuade the goddess to take up a position in the saloon for the night;
and, much as he had suffered from her, there was something traitorous in
delivering her over to these coarse burglars.

he waited until the statue showed signs of returning animation, and then
said, "good evening, mum," more obsequiously than usual.

she never deigned to notice or return his salutations. "hairdresser,"
she said abruptly, "i am weary of this sordid place."

he was pleased, for it furthered his views. "it isn't so sordid in the
saloon, where you stood the other evening, you know," he replied. "will
you step down there?"

"bah!" she said, "it is _all_ sordid. leander, a restlessness has come
upon me. i come back night after night out of the vagueness in which i
have lain so long, and for what? to stand here in this mean chamber and
proffer my favour, only to find it repulsed, disdained. i am tired of
it--tired!"

"you can't be more tired of it than i am!" he said.

"i ask myself," she went on, "why, having, through your means, ascended
once more to the earth, which i left so fair, i seek not those things
which once delighted me. this city of yours--all that i have seen of
it--revolts me; but it is vast, vaster than those built by the mortals
of old. surely somewhere there must be brightness in it and beauty, and
the colour and harmony by which men knew once to delight the gods
themselves. it cannot be that the gods of old are all forgotten; surely,
somewhere there yet lingers a little band of faithful ones, who have not
turned from aphrodite."

"i can't say, i'm sure," said leander; "i could inquire for you."

"i myself will seek for them," she said proudly. "i will go forth this
very night."

leander choked. "to-night!" he cried. "you _can't_ go to-night."

"you forget yourself," she returned haughtily.

"if i let you go," he said hesitatingly, "will you promise faithfully to
be back in half an hour?"

"do you not yet understand that you have to do with a goddess--with
aphrodite herself?" she said. "who are you, to presume to fetter me by
your restrictions? truly, the indulgence i have shown has turned your
weak brain."

he put his back against the door. he was afraid of the goddess, but he
was still more afraid of the burglars' vengeance if they arrived to find
the prize missing.

"i'm sorry to disoblige a lady," he said; "but you don't go out of this
house to-night."

in another minute he was lying in the fender amongst the
fireirons--alone! how it was done he was too stunned to remember; but
the goddess was gone. if she did not return by midnight, what would
become of him? if he had only been civil to her, she might have stayed;
but now she had abandoned him to certain destruction!

a kind of fatalistic stupor seized him. he would not run away--he would
have to come home some time--nor would he call in the police, for he had
a very vivid recollection of mr. braddle's threat in such a contingency.

he went, instead, into the dark saloon, and sat down in a chair to wait.
he wondered how he could explain the statue's absence. if he told the
burglars it had gone for a stroll, they would tear him limb from limb.
"i was so confoundedly artful about potter," he thought bitterly, "that
they'll never believe now i haven't warned him!"

at every sound outside he shook like a leaf; the quarters, as they
sounded from the church clock, sank like cold weights upon his heart.
"if only venus would come back first!" he moaned; but the statue never
returned.

at last he heard steps--muffled ones--on the paved alley outside. he had
forgotten to leave the window unfastened, after all, and he was too
paralysed to do it now.

the steps were in the little yard, or rather a sort of back area,
underneath the window. "it may be only a constable," he tried to say to
himself; but there is no mistaking the constabulary tread, which is not
fairy-like, or even gentle, like that he heard.

a low whistle destroyed his last hope. in a quite unpremeditated manner
he put out the gas and rolled under a leather divan which stood at the
end of the room. he wished now, with all his heart, that he had run away
while he had the chance; but it was too late.

"i hope they'll do it with a revolver, and not a knife," he thought.
"oh, my poor matilda! you little know what i'm going through just now,
and what'll be going through _me_ in another minute!"

a hoarse voice under the window called out, "tweddle!"

he lay still. "none o' that, yer skulker; i know yer there!" said the
voice again. "do yer want to give me the job o' coming after yer?"

after all, leander reflected, there was the window and a thick
half-shutter between them. it might be best not to provoke mr. braddle
at the outset. he came half out of his hiding-place. "is that you, mr.
braddle?" he quavered.

"ah!" said the voice, affirmatively. "is this what you call being ready
for us? why, the bloomin' winder ain't even undone!"

"that's what i'm here for," said poor leander. "is the--the other
gentleman out there too?"

"you mind your business! you'll find something the count give me to
bring yer; i've put it on the winder-sill out 'ere. and you obey horders
next time, will yer?"

the footsteps were heard retreating. mr. braddle was apparently going
back to fetch his captain. leander let down the shutter, and opened the
window. he could not see, but he could feel a thick, rough bundle lying
on the window-sill.

he drew this in, slammed down the window, and ran up the shutter in a
second, before the two could have had time to discover him.

"now," he thought, "i _will_ run for it;" and he groped his way out of
the dark saloon to the front shop, where he paused, and, taking a match
from his pocket, struck a light. his parcel proved to be rough
sackcloth, on the outside of which a paper was pinned.

why did the count write, when he was coming in directly? curiosity made
him linger even then to ascertain this. the paper contained a hasty
scrawl in blue chalk. "_not to-night_," he read; "_arrangements still
uncomplete. expect us to-morrow night without fail, and see that
everything is prepared. cloth sent with this for packing goods. p
laid up with professional accident, and safe for a week or two. you must
have known this--why not say so last night? no trifling, if you value
life!_"

it was a reprieve--at the last moment! he had a whole day before him for
flight, and he fully intended to flee this time; those hours of suspense
in the saloon were too terrible to be gone through twice.

but as he was turning out his cashbox, and about to go upstairs and
collect a few necessaries, he heard a well-known tread outside. he ran
to the door, which he unfastened with trembling hands, and the statue,
with the hood drawn closely round her strange painted face, passed in
without seeming to heed his presence.

she had come back to him. why should he run away now, when, if he waited
one more night, he might be rescued from one of his terrors by means of
the other?

"lady venus!" he cried hysterically. "oh, lady venus, mum, i thought you
was gone for ever!"

"and you have grieved?" she said almost tenderly. "you welcome my return
with joy! know then, leander, that i myself feel pleasure in returning,
even to such a roof as this; for little gladness have i had from my
wanderings. upon no altar did i see my name shine, nor the perfumed
flame flicker; the lydian measures were silent, and the praise of
cytherea. and everywhere i went i found the same senseless troubled
haste, and pale mean faces of men, and squalor, and tumult. grace and
joyousness have fled--even from your revelry! but i have seen your new
gods, and understand: for, all grimy and mis-shapen and uncouth are they
as they stand in your open places and at the corners of your streets.
zeus, what a place must olympus now be! and can any men worship such
monsters, and be gladsome?"

leander did not perceive the very natural mistake into which the goddess
had fallen; but the fact was, that she had come upon some of our justly
renowned public statues.

"i'm sorry you haven't enjoyed yourself, mum," was all he could find to
say.

"should i linger in such scenes were it not for you?" she cried
reproachfully. "how much longer will you repulse me?"

"that depends on you, mum," he ventured to observe.

"ah! you are cold!" she said reproachfully; "yet surely i am worthy of
the adoration of the proudest mortal. judge me not by this marble
exterior, cunningly wrought though it be. charms are mine, more dazzling
than any your imagination can picture; and could you surrender your
being to my hands, i should be able to show myself as i really
am--supreme in loveliness and majesty!"

unfortunately, the hairdresser's imagination was not his strongest
point. he could not dissociate the goddess from the marble shape she had
assumed, and that shape he was not sufficiently educated to admire; he
merely coughed now in a deferential manner.

"i perceive that i cannot move you," she said. "men have grown strangely
stubborn and impervious. i leave you, then, to your obstinacy; only take
heed lest you provoke me at last to wrath, for my patience is well-nigh
at an end!"

and she was gone, and the bedizened statue stood there, staring hardly
at him with the eyes his own hand had given her.

"this has been the most trying evening i've had yet," he thought. "thank
my stars, if all goes well, i shall get rid of her by this time
to-morrow!"

the next day passed uneventfully enough, though the unfortunate
leander's apprehensions increased with every hour. as before, he closed
early, got his apprentice safely off the premises, and sat down to wait
in his saloon. he knew that the statue (which he had concealed during
the day behind a convenient curtain) would probably recover
consciousness for some part of the evening, as it had rarely failed to
do, and prudence urged him to keep an eye over the proceedings of his
tormentress.

to his horror, aphrodite's first words, after awaking, expressed her
intention of repeating the search for homage and beauty, which had been
so unsuccessful the night before!

"seek not to detain me, leander," she said; "for, goddess as i am, i am
drooping under this persistent obduracy. somewhere beyond this murky
labyrinth, it may be that i shall find a shrine where i am yet
honoured. i will go forth, and never rest till i have found it, and my
troubled spirits are revived by the incense for which i have languished
so long. i am weary of abasing myself to such a contemptuous mortal, nor
will i longer endure such indignity. stand back, and open the gates for
me! why do you not obey?"

he knew now that to attempt force would be useless; and yet if she left
him this time, he must either abandon all that life held for him, and
fly to distant parts from the burglars' vengeance--or remain to meet a
too probable doom!

he fell on his knees before her. "oh, lady venus," he entreated, "don't
leave me! i beg and implore you not to! if you do, you will kill me! i
give you my honest word you will!"

the statue's face seemed irradiated by a sudden joy. she paused, and
glanced down with an approving smile upon the kneeling figure at her
feet.

"why did you not kneel to me before?" she said.

"because i never thought of it," said the hairdresser, honestly; "but
i'll stay on my knees for hours, if only you won't go!"

"but what has made you thus eager, thus humble?" she said, half in
wonder and half in suspicion. "can it be, that the spark i have sought
to kindle in your breast is growing to a flame at last? leander, can
this thing be?"

he saw that she was gratified, that she desired to be assured that this
was indeed so.

"i shouldn't be surprised if something like that was going on inside of
me," he said encouragingly.

"answer me more frankly," she said. "do you wish me to remain with
you because you have learnt to love my presence?"

it was a very embarrassing position for him. all depended upon his
convincing the goddess of his dawning love, and yet, for the life of
him, he could not force out the requisite tenderness; his imagination
was unequal to the task.

another and a more creditable feeling helped to tie his tongue--a sense
of shame at employing such a subterfuge in order to betray the goddess
into the lawless hands of these housebreakers. however, she must be
induced to stay by some means.

"well," he said sheepishly, "you don't give me a chance to love you, if
you go wandering out every evening, do you?"

she gave a low cry of triumph. "it has come!" she exclaimed. "what are
clouds of incense, flowers, and homage, to this? be of good heart; i
will stay, leander. fear not, but speak the passion which consumes you!"

he became alarmed. he was anxious not to commit himself, and yet employ
the time until the burglars might be expected.

"the fact is," he confessed, "it hasn't gone so far as that yet--it's
beginning; all it wants is _time_, you know--time, and being let alone."

"all time will be before us, when once your lips have pronounced the
words of surrender, and our spirits are transported together to the
enchanted isle."

"you talk about me going over to this isle--this cyprus," he said; "but
it's a long journey, and i can't afford it. how _you_ come and go, i
don't know; but i've not been brought up to it myself. i can't flash
across like a telegram!"

"trust all to me," she said. "is not your love strong enough for that?"

"not quite yet," he answered; "it's coming on. only, you see, it's a
serious step to take, and i naturally wish to feel my way. i declare,
the more i gaze upon the--the elegant form and figger which i see before
me, the stronger and the more irresistible comes over me a burning
desire to think the whole thing carefully over. and if you only allowed
me a little longer to gaze (i've no time to myself except in the
evenings), i don't think it would be long before this affair reached a
'appy termination--i don't indeed!"

"gaze, then," she said, smiling--"gaze to your soul's content."

"i mean no offence," he represented, having felt his way to a stroke of
supreme cunning, "but when i feel there's a goddess inside of this
statue, i don't know how it is exactly, but it puts me off. i can't fix
my thoughts; the--the passion don't ferment as it ought. if, supposing
now, you was to withdraw yourself and leave me the statue? i could gaze
on it, and think of thee, and cyprus, and all the rest of it, more
comfortable, so to speak, than what i can when you're animating of it,
and making me that nervous, words can't describe it!"

he hardly dared to hope that so lame and transparent a device would
succeed with her; but, as he had previously found, there was a certain
spice of credulity and simplicity in her nature, which made it possible
to impose upon her occasionally.

"it may be so," she said. "i overawe thee, perchance?"

"very much so," said he, promptly. "you don't intend it, i know; but
it's a fact."

"i will leave you to meditate upon the charms so faintly shadowed in
this image, remembering that whatever of loveliness you find herein will
be multiplied ten thousand-fold in the actual aphrodite! remain, then;
ponder and gaze--and love!"

he waited for a little while after the statue was silent, and then took
up the sacking left for him by braddle; twice he attempted to throw it
over the marble, and twice he recoiled. "it's no use," he said, "i can't
do it; they must do it themselves!"

he carefully unfastened the window at the back of his saloon, and,
placing the statue in the centre of the floor, turned out the gas, and
with a beating heart stole upstairs to his bedroom, where (with his door
bolted) he waited anxiously for the arrival of his dreaded deliverers.

he scarcely knew how long he had been there, for a kind of waking dream
had come upon him, in which he was providing the statue with light
refreshment in the shape of fancy pebbles and liquid cement, when the
long, low whistle, faintly heard from the back of the house, brought him
back to his full senses.

the burglars had come! he unbolted the door and stole out to the top of
the crazy staircase, intending to rush back and bolt himself in if he
heard steps ascending; and for some minutes he strained his ears,
without being able to catch a sound.

at last he heard the muffled creak of the window, as it was thrown up.
they were coming in! would they, or would they not, be inhuman enough to
force him to assist them in the removal?

they were still in the saloon; he heard them trampling about, moving the
furniture with unnecessary violence, and addressing one another in tones
that were not caressing. now they were carrying the statue to the
window; he heard their labouring breath and groans of exertion under the
burden.

another pause. he stole lower down the staircase, until he was outside
his sitting-room, and could hear better. there! that was the thud as
they leapt out on the flagged yard. a second and heavier thud--the
goddess! how would they get her over the wall? had they brought steps,
ropes, or what? no matter; they knew their own business, and were not
likely to have forgotten anything. but how long they were about it!
suppose a constable were to come by and see the cart!

there were sounds at last; they were scaling the wall--floundering,
apparently; and no wonder, with such a weight to hoist after them! more
thuds; and then the steps of men staggering slowly, painfully away. the
steps echoed louder from under the archway, and then died away in
silence.

could they be really gone? he dared not hope so, and remained shivering
in his sitting-room for some minutes; until, gaining courage, he
determined to go down and shut the window, to avoid any suspicion.
although now that the burglars were safely off with their prize, even
their capture could not implicate him. he rather hoped they _would_ be
caught!

he took a lighted candle, and descended. as he entered the saloon, a
gust from the open window blew out the light. he stood there in the dark
and an icy draught; and, beginning to grope about in the dark for the
matches, he brushed against something which was soft and had a
cloth-like texture. "it's braddle!" he thought, and his blood ran cold;
"or else the count!" and he called them both respectfully. there was no
reply; no sound of breathing, even.

ha! here was a box of matches at last! he struck a light in feverish
haste, and lit the nearest gas-bracket. for an instant he could see
nothing, in the sudden glare; but the next moment he fell back against
the wall with a cry of horror and despair.

for there, in the centre of the disordered room, stood--not the count,
not braddle--but the statue, the mantle thrown back from her arms, and
those arms, and the folds of the marble drapery, spotted here and there
with stains of dark crimson!

damocles dines out

x.

"to feed were best at home."--_macbeth._

as soon as leander had recovered from the first shock of horror and
disappointment, he set himself to efface the stains with which the
statue and the oilcloth were liberally bespattered; he was burning to
find out what had happened to make such desperadoes abandon their design
at the point of completion.

they both seemed to have bled freely. had they quarrelled, or what? he
went out into the yard with a hand-lamp, trembling lest he should come
upon one or more corpses; but the place was bare, and he then remembered
having heard them stumble and flounder over the wall.

he came back in utter bewilderment; the statue, standing calm and
lifeless as he had himself placed it, could tell him nothing, and he
went back to his bedroom full of the vaguest fears.

the next day was a saturday, and he passed it in the state of continual
apprehension which was becoming his normal condition. he expected every
moment to see or hear from the baffled ruffians, who would, no doubt,
consider him responsible for their failure; but no word nor sign came
from them, and the uncertainty drove him very near distraction.

as the night approached, he almost welcomed it, as a time when the
goddess herself would enlighten part of his ignorance; and he waited
more impatiently than ever for her return.

he was made to wait long that evening, until he almost began to think
that the marble was deserted altogether; but at length, as he watched,
the statue gave a long, shuddering sigh, and seemed to gaze round the
saloon with vacant eyes.

"where am i?" she murmured. "ah! i remember. leander, while you
slumbered, impious hands were laid upon this image!"

"dear me, mum; you don't say so!" exclaimed leander.

"it is the truth! from afar i felt the indignity that was purposed, and
hastened to protect my image, to find it in the coarse grasp of godless
outlaws. leander, they were about to drag me away by force--away from
thee!"

"i'm very sorry you should have been disturbed," said leander; and he
certainly was. "so you came back and caught them at it, did you? and
wh--what did you do to 'em, if i may inquire?"

"i know not," she said simply. "i caused them to be filled with mad
fury, and they fell upon one another blindly, and fought like wild
beasts around my image until strength failed them, and they sank to the
ground; and when they were able, they fled from my presence, and i saw
them no more."

"you--you didn't kill them outright, then?" said leander, not feeling
quite sure whether he would be glad or not to hear that they had
forfeited their lives.

"they were unworthy of such a death," she said; "so i let them crawl
away. henceforth they will respect our images."

"i should say they would, most likely, madam," agreed leander. "i do
assure you, i'm almost glad of it myself--i am; it served them both
right."

"_almost_ glad! and do you not rejoice from your heart that i yet remain
to you?"

"why," said leander, "it is, in course, a most satisfactory and
agreeable termination, i'm sure."

"who knows whether, if this my image had once been removed from you, i
could have found it in my power to return?" she said; "for, i ween, the
power that is left me has limits. i might never have appeared to you
again. think of it, leander."

"i was thinking of it," he replied. "it quite upsets me to think how
near it was."

"you are moved. you love me well, do you not, leander?"

"oh! i suppose i do," he said--"well enough."

"well enough to abandon this gross existence, and fly with me where none
can separate us?"

"i never said nothing about that," he answered.

"but yesternight and you confessed that you were yielding--that ere long
i should prevail."

"so i am," he said; "but it will take me some time to yield thoroughly.
you wouldn't believe how slow i yield; why, i haven't hardly begun yet!"

"and how long a time will pass before you are fully prepared?"

"i'm afraid i can't say, not exactly; it may be a month, or it might
only be a week, or again, it may be a year. i'm so dependent upon the
weather. so, if you're in any kind of a hurry, i couldn't advise you, as
a honest man, to wait for me."

"i will not wait a year!" she said fiercely. "you mock me with such
words. i tell you again that my forbearance will last but little
longer. more of this laggard love, and i will shame you before your
fellow-men as an ingrate and a dastard! i will; by my zone, i will!"

"now, mum, you're allowing yourself to get excited," said leander,
soothingly. "i wouldn't talk about it no more this evening; we shall do
no good. i can't arrange to go with you just yet, and there's an end of
it."

"you will find that that is not the end of it, clod-witted slave that
you are!"

"now, don't call names; it's beneath you."

"ay, indeed! for are not _you_ beneath me? but for very shame i will not
abandon what is justly mine; nor shall you, wily and persuasive
hairdresser though you be, withstand my sovereign will with impunity!"

"so you say, mum!" said leander, with a touch of his native
impertinence.

"as i say, i shall act; but no more of this, or you will anger me before
the time. let me depart."

"i'm not hindering you," he said; but she did not remain long enough to
resent his words. he sat down with a groan. "whatever will become of
me?" he soliloquized dismally. "she gets more pressing every evening,
and she's been taking to threatening dreadful of late.... if the count
and that braddle ever come back now, it won't be to take her off my
hands; it'll more likely be to have my life for letting them into such a
trap. they'll think it was some trick of mine, i shouldn't wonder....
and to-morrow's sunday, and i've got to dine with aunt, and meet matilda
and her ma. a pretty state of mind i'm in for going out to dinner, after
the awful week i've had of it! but there'll be some comfort in seeing my
darling tillie again; _she_ ain't a statue, bless her!"

"as for you, mum," he said to the unconscious statue, "i'm going to lock
you up in your old quarters, where you can't get out and do mischief. i
do think i'm entitled to have my sunday quiet."

after which he contrived to toil upstairs with the image, not without
considerable labour and frequent halts to recover his breath; for
although, as we have already noted, the marble, after being infused with
life, seemed to lose something of its normal weight, it was no light
burden, even then, to be undertaken single-handed.

he slept long and late that sunday morning; for he had been too
preoccupied for the last few days to make any arrangements for attending
chapel with his matilda, and he was in sore need of repose besides. so
he rose just in time to swallow his coffee and array himself carefully
for his aunt's early dinner, leaving his two sunday papers--the
theatrical and the general organs--unread on his table.

it was a foggy, dull day, and millman street, never a cheerful
thoroughfare, looked gloomier than ever as he turned into it. but one of
those dingy fronts held matilda--a circumstance which irradiated the
entire district for him.

he had scarcely time to knock before the door was opened by matilda in
person. she looked more charming than ever, in a neat dark dress, with a
little white collar and cuffs. her hair was arranged in a new fashion,
being banded by a neat braided tress across the crown; and her grey
eyes, usually serene and cold, were bright and eager.

the hairdresser felt his heart swell with love at the sight of her. what
a lucky man he was, after all, to have such a girl as this to care for
him! if he could keep her--ah, if he could only keep her!

"i told your aunt _i_ was going to open the door to you," she said. "i
wantedoh, leander, you've not brought it, after all!"

"meaning what, tillie, my darling?" said leander.

"oh, you know--my cloak!"

he had had so much to think about that he had really forgotten the cloak
of late.

"well, no, i've not brought that--not the cloak, tillie," he said
slowly.

"what a time they are about it!" complained matilda.

"you see," explained the poor man, "when a cloak like that is damaged,
it has to be sent back to the manufacturers to be done, and they've so
many things on their hands. i couldn't promise that you'll have that
cloak--well, not this side of christmas, at least."

"you must have been very rough with it, then, leander," she remarked.

"i was," he said. "i don't know how i came to _be_ so rough. you see, i
was trying to tear it off" but here he stopped.

"trying to tear it off what?"

"trying to tear it off nothink, but trying to tear the wrapper off _it_.
it was so involved," he added, "with string and paper and that; and i'm
a clumsy, unlucky sort of chap, sweet one; and i'm uncommon sorry about
it, that i am!"

"well, we won't say any more about it," said matilda, softened by his
contrition. "and i'm keeping you out in the passage all this time. come
in, and be introduced to mamma; she's in the front parlour, waiting to
make your acquaintance."

mrs. collum was a stout lady, with a thin voice. she struck a nameless
fear into leander's soul as he was led up to where she sat. he
thought that she contained all the promise of a very terrible
mother-in-law.

"this is leander, mamma dear," said matilda, shyly and yet proudly.

her mother inspected him for a moment, and then half closed her eyes.
"my daughter tells me that you carry on the occupation of a
hairdresser," she said.

"quite correct, madam," said leander; "i do."

"ah! well," she said, with an unconcealed sigh, "i could have wished to
look higher than hairdressing for my matilda; but there are
opportunities of doing good even as a hairdresser. i trust you are
sensible of that."

"i try to do as little 'arm as i can," he said feebly.

"if you do not do good, you must do harm," she said uncompromisingly.
"you have it in your means to be an awakening influence. no one knows
the power that a single serious hairdresser might effect with worldly
customers. have you never thought of that?"

"well, i can't say i have exactly," he said; "and i don't see how."

"there are cheap and appropriate illuminated texts," she said, "to be
had at so much a dozen; you could hang them on your walls. there are
tracts you procure by the hundred; you could put them in the lining of
hats as you hang them up; you could wrap them round your--your bottles
and pomatum-pots. you could drop a word in season in your customer's ear
as you bent over him. and you tell me you don't see how; you _will_ not
see, i fear, mr. tweddle."

"i'm afraid, mum," he replied, "my customers would consider i was taking
liberties."

"and what of that, so long as you save them?"

"well, you see, i shouldn't--i should _lose_ 'em! and it's not done in
our profession; and, to tell you the honest truth, i'm not given that
way myself--not to the extent of tracks and suchlike, that is."

matilda's mother groaned; it was hard to find a son-in-law with whom she
had nothing in common, and who was a hairdresser into the bargain.

"well, well," she said, "we must expect crosses in this life; though for
my own daughter to lay this one upon me is--isbut i will not
repine."

"i'm sorry you regard me in the light of a cross," said leander; "but,
whether i'm a cross or a naught, i'm a respectable man, and i love your
daughter, mum, and i'm in a position to maintain her."

leander hated to have to appear under false pretences, of which he had
had more than enough of late. he was glad now to speak out plainly,
particularly as he had no reason to fear this old woman.

"hush, leander! mamma didn't mean to be unkind; did you, mamma?" said
matilda.

"i said what i felt," she said. "we will not discuss it further. if, in
time, i see reason for bestowing my blessing upon a choice which at
presentbut no matter. if i see reason in time, i will not withhold
it. i can hardly be expected to approve at present."

"you shall take your own time, mum; _i_ won't hurry you," said leander.
"tillie is blessing enough for me--not but what i shall be glad to be on
a pleasant footing with you, i'm sure, if you can bring yourself to it."

before mrs. collum could reply, miss louisa tweddle made an opportune
appearance, to the relief of matilda, in whom her mother's attitude was
causing some uneasiness.

miss tweddle was a well-preserved little woman, with short curly
iron-grey hair and sharp features. in manner she was brisk, not to say
chirpy, but she secreted sentiment in large quantities. she was very far
from the traditional landlady, and where she lost lodgers occasionally
she retained friends. she regarded mrs. collum with something like
reverence, as an acquaintance of her youth who had always occupied a
superior social position, and she was proud, though somewhat guiltily
so, that her favourite nephew should have succeeded in captivating the
daughter of a dentist.

she kissed leander on both cheeks. "he's done the best of all my
nephews, mrs. collum, ma'am," she explained, "and he's never caused me a
moment's anxiety since i first had the care of him, when he was first
apprenticed to catchpole's in holborn, and paid me for his board."

"well, well," said mrs. collum, "i hope he never may cause anxiety to
you, or to any one."

"i'll answer for it, he won't," said his aunt. "i wish you could see him
dress a head of hair."

mrs. collum shut her eyes again. "if at his age he has not acquired the
necessary skill for his line in life," she observed, "it would be a very
melancholy thing to reflect upon."

"yes, wouldn't it?" agreed miss tweddle; "you say very truly, mrs.
collum. but he's got ideas and notions beyond what you'd expect in a
hairdresser--haven't you, leandy? tell miss collum's dear ma about the
new machines you've invented for altering people's hands and eyes and
features."

"i don't care to be told," the lady struck in. "to my mind, it's nothing
less than sheer impiety to go improving the features we've been endowed
with. we ought to be content as we are, and be thankful we've been sent
into the world with any features at all. those are my opinions!"

"ah," said the politic leander, "but some people are saved having resort
to art for improvement, and we oughtn't to blame them as are less
favoured for trying to render themselves more agreeable as spectacles,
ought we?"

"and if every one thought with you," added his aunt, with distinctly
inferior tact, "where would your poor dear 'usband have been, mrs.
collum, ma'am?"

"my dear husband was not on the same level--he was a medical man; and,
besides, though he replaced nature in one of her departments, he had too
much principle to _imitate_ her. had he been (or had i allowed him to
be) less conscientious, his practice would have been largely extended;
but i can truthfully declare that not a single one of his false teeth
was capable of deceiving for an instant. i hope," she added to leander,
"you, in your own different way, are as scrupulous."

"why, the fact is," said leander, whose professional susceptibilities
were now aroused, "i am essentially an artist. when i look around, i see
that nature out of its bounty has supplied me with a choice selection of
patterns to follow, and i reproduce them as faithful as lies within my
abilities. you may call it a fine thing to take a blank canvas, and
represent the luxurious tresses and the blooming hue of 'ealth upon it,
and so do i; but i call it a still higher and nobler act to produce a
similar effect upon a human 'ed!"

"isn't that a pretty speech for a young man like him--only
twenty-seven--mrs. collum?" exclaimed his admiring aunt.

"you see, mamma dear," pleaded matilda, who saw that her parent remained
unaffected, "it isn't as if leander was in poor papa's profession."

"i hope, matilda," said the lady sharply, "you are not going to pain me
again by mentioning this young man and your departed father in the same
breath, because i cannot bear it."

"the old lady," reflected leander here, "don't seem to take to me!"

"i'm sure," said miss tweddle, "leandy quite feels what an honour it is
to him to look forward to such a connection as yours is. when i first
heard of it, i said at once, 'leandy, you can't never mean it; she won't
look at you; it's no use your asking her,' i said. and i quite scolded
myself for ever bringing them together!"

mrs. collum seemed inclined to follow suit, but she restrained herself.
"ah! well," she observed, "my daughter has chosen to take her own way,
without consulting my prejudices. all i hope is, that she may never
repent it!"

"very handsomely said, ma'am," chimed in miss tweddle; "and, if i know
my nephew, repent it she never will!"

leander was looking rather miserable; but matilda put out her hand to
him behind his aunt's back, and their eyes and hands met, and he was
happy again.

"you must be wanting your dinner, mrs. collum," his aunt proceeded; "and
we are only waiting for another lady and gentleman to make up the party.
i don't know what's made them so behindhand, i'm sure. he's a very
pleasant young man, and punctual to the second when he lodged with me. i
happened to run across him up by chancery lane the other evening, and he
said to me, in his funny way, 'i've been and gone and done it, miss
tweddle, since i saw you. i'm a happy man; and i'm thinking of bringing
my young lady soon to introduce to you.' so i asked them to come and
take a bit of dinner with me to-day, and i told him two o'clock sharp,
i'm sure. ah, there they are at last! that's mr. jauncy's knock, among a
thousand."

leander started. "aunt!" he cried, "you haven't asked jauncy here
to-day?"

"yes, i did, leandy. i knew you used to be friends when you were
together here, and i thought how nice it would be for both your young
ladies to make each other's acquaintance; but i didn't tell _him_
anything. i meant it for a surprise."

and she bustled out to receive her guests, leaving leander speechless.
what if the new-comers were to make some incautious reference to that
pleasure-party on saturday week? could he drop them a warning hint?

"don't you like this mr. jauncy, leander?" whispered matilda, who had
observed his ghastly expression.

"i like him well enough," he returned, with an effort; "but i'd rather
we had no third parties, i must say."

here mr. jauncy came in alone, miss tweddle having retired to assist the
lady to take off her bonnet.

leander went to meet him. "james," he said in an agitated whisper, "have
you brought bella?"

jauncy nodded. "we were talking of you as we came along," he said in the
same tone, "and i advise you to look out--she's got her quills up, old
chap!"

"what about?" murmured leander.

mr. jauncy's grin was wider and more appreciative than ever as he
replied, mysteriously, "rosherwich!"

leander would have liked to ask in what respect miss parkinson
considered herself injured by the expedition to rosherwich; but, before
he could do so, his aunt returned with the young lady in question.

bella was gorgeously dressed, and made her entrance with the stiffest
possible dignity. "miss parkinson, my dear," said her hostess, "you
mustn't be made a stranger of. that lady sitting there on the sofa is
mrs. collum, and this gentleman is a friend of _your_ gentleman's, and
my nephew, leandy."

"oh, thank you," said bella, "but i've no occasion to be told mr.
tweddle's name; we have met before--haven't we, mr. tweddle?"

he looked at her, and saw her brows clouded, and her nose and mouth with
a pinched look about them. she was annoyed with him evidently--but why?

"we have," was all he could reply.

"why, how nice that is, to be sure!" exclaimed his aunt. "i might have
thought of it, too, mr. jauncy, and you being such friends and all. and
p'r'aps you know this lady, too--miss collum--as leandy is keeping
company along with?"

bella's expression changed to something blacker still. "no," she said,
fixing her eyes on the still unconscious leander; "i made sure that mr.
tweddle was courting _a_ young lady, but--but--well, this _is_ a
surprise, mr. tweddle! you never told us of this when last we met. i
shall have news for somebody!"

"oh, but it's only been arranged within the last month or two!" said
miss tweddle.

"considering we met so lately, he might have done us the compliment of
mentioning it, i must say!" said bella.

"i--i thought you knew," stammered the hairdresser; "i told"

"no, you didn't, excuse me; oh no, you didn't, or some things would have
happened differently. it was the place and all that made you forget it,
very likely."

"when did you meet one another, and where was it, miss parkinson?"
inquired matilda, rather to include herself in the conversation than
from any devouring curiosity.

leander struck in hoarsely. "we met," he explained, "some time since,
quite casual."

bella's eyes lit up with triumphant malice. "what!" she said, "do you
call yesterday week such a long while? what a compliment that is,
though! and so he's not even mentioned it to you, miss collum? dear me,
i wonder what reasons he had for that, now!"

"there's nothing to wonder at," said leander; "my memory does play me
tricks of that sort."

"ah, if it was only you it played tricks on! there's miss collum dying
to know what it's all about, i can see."

"indeed, miss parkinson, i'm nothing of the sort," retorted matilda,
proudly. privately her reflection was: "she's got a lovely gown on, but
she's a common girl, for all that; and she's trying to set me against
leander for some reason, and she shan't do it."

"well," said bella, "you're a fortunate man, mr. tweddle, that you are,
in every way. i'm afraid i shouldn't be so easy with my james."

"there's no need for being afraid about it," her james put in; "you
aren't!"

"i hope you haven't as much cause, though," she retorted.

leander listened to her malicious innuendo with a bewildered agony. why
on earth was she making this dead set at him? she was amiable enough on
saturday week. it never occurred to him that his conduct to her sister
could account for it, for had he not told ada straightforwardly how he
was situated?

fortunately dinner was announced to be ready just then, and bella was
silenced for the moment in the general movement to the next room.

leander took in matilda's mamma, who had been studiously abstracting
herself from all surrounding objects for the last few minutes. "that
bella is a downright basilisk," he thought dismally, as he led the way.
"lord, how i do wish dinner was done!"

denounced

xi.

"there's a new foot on the floor, my friend;
and a new face at the door, my friend;
a new face at the door."

leander sat at the head of the table as carver, having mrs. collum and
bella on his left, and james and matilda opposite to them.

james was the first to open conversation, by the remark to mrs. collum,
across the table, that they were "having another dull sunday."

"that," rejoined the uncompromising lady, "seems to me a highly improper
remark, sir."

"my friend jauncy," explained leander, in defence of his abashed
companion, "was not alluding to present company, i'm sure. he meant the
dulness _outside_--the fog, and so on."

"i knew it," she said; "and i repeat that it is improper and irreverent
to speak of a dull sunday in that tone of complaint. haven't we all the
week to be lively in?"

"and i'm sure, ma'am," said jauncy, recovering himself, "you make the
most of your time. talking of fog, tweddle, did you see those lines on
it in to-day's _umpire_? very smart, i call them; regular witty."

"and do you both read a paper on sunday mornings with 'smart' and
'witty' lines in it?" demanded mrs. collum.

"i--i hadn't time this morning," said the unregenerate leander; "but i
do occasionally cast an eye over it before i get up."

mrs. collum groaned, and looked at her daughter reproachfully.

"i see by the _weekly news_," said jauncy, "you've had a burglary in
your neighbourhood."

leander let the carving-knife slip. "a burglary! what! in my
neighbourhood? when?"

"well, p'r'aps not a burglary; but a capture of two that were 'wanted'
for it. it's all in to-day's _news_."

"i--i haven't seen a paper for the last two days," said leander, his
heart beating with hope. "tell us about it!"

"why, it isn't much to tell; but it seems that last friday night, or
early on saturday morning, the constable on duty came upon two
suspicious-looking chaps, propped up insensible against the railings in
queen square, covered with blood, and unable to account for themselves.
whether they'd been trying to break in somewhere and been beaten off, or
had quarrelled, or met with some accident, doesn't seem to be known for
certain. but, anyway, they were arrested for loitering at night with
housebreaking things about them; and, when they were got to the station,
recognized as the men 'wanted' for shooting a policeman down at
camberwell some time back, and if it is proved against them they'll be
hung, for certain."

"what were they called? did it say?" asked leander, eagerly.

"i forget one--something like bradawl, i believe; the other had a lot of
aliases, but he was best known as the 'count,' from having lived a good
deal abroad, and speaking broken english like a native."

leander's spirits rose, in spite of his present anxieties. he had been
going in fear and dread of the revenge of these ruffians, and they were
safely locked up; they could trouble him no more. small wonder, then,
that his security in this respect made him better able to cope with
minor dangers; and bella's animosity seemed lulled, too--at least, she
had not opened her mouth, except for food, since she sat down.

in his expansion, he gave himself the airs of a host. "i hope," he said,
"i've served you all to your likings? miss parkinson, you're not getting
on; allow me to offer you a little more pork."

"thank you, mr. tweddle," said the implacable bella, "but i won't
trouble you. i haven't an appetite to-day--like i had at those gardens."

there was a challenge in this answer--not only to him, but to general
curiosity--which, to her evident disappointment, was not taken up.

leander turned to jauncy. "i--i suppose you had no trouble in finding
your way here?" he said.

"no," said jauncy, "not more than usual; the streets were pretty full,
and that makes it harder to get along."

"we met such quantities of soldiers," put in bella. "do you remember
those two soldiers at rosherwich, mr. tweddle? how funny they did look,
dancing; didn't they? but i suppose i mustn't say anything about the
dancing here, must i?"

"since," said the poor badgered man, "you put it to me, miss parkinson,
i must say that, considering the _day_, you know"

"yes," continued mrs. collum, severely; "surely there are better topics
for the sabbath than--than a dancing soldier!"

"mr. tweddle knows why i stopped myself," said bella. "but there, i
won't tell of you--not now, at all events; so don't look like that at
me!"

"there, bella, that'll do," said her _fiancé_, suddenly awakening to the
fact that she was trying to make herself disagreeable, and perhaps
feeling slightly ashamed of her.

"james! i know what to say and what to leave unsaid, without tellings
from you; thanks all the same. you needn't fear my saying a word about
mr. tweddle and ada--la, now, if i haven't gone and said it! what a
stupid i am to run on so!"

"_drop_ it, bella! do you hear? that's enough," growled jauncy.

leander sat silent; he did not attempt again to turn the conversation:
he knew better. matilda seemed perfectly calm, and certainly showed no
surface curiosity; but he feared that her mother intended to require
explanations.

miss tweddle came in here with the original remark that winter had begun
now in good earnest.

"yes," said bella. "why, as we came along, there wasn't hardly a leaf on
the trees in the squares; and yet only yesterday week, at the gardens,
the trees hadn't begun to shed. had they, mr. tweddle? oh, but i forgot;
you were so taken up with paying attention to ada(_well_, james! i
suppose i can make a remark!)"

"i'll never take you out again, if you don't hold that tongue," he
whispered savagely.

mrs. collum fixed her eyes on leander, as he sat cowering on her right.
"leander tweddle," she said, in a hissing whisper, "what is that young
person talking about? who--who is this 'ada'? i insist upon being
told."

"if you want to know, ask her," he retorted desperately.

all this by-play passed unnoticed by miss tweddle, who was probably too
full of the cares of a hostess to pay attention to it; and, accordingly,
she judged the pause that followed the fitting opportunity for a little
speech.

"mrs. collum, ma'am," she began; "and my dearest miss matilda, the
flower of all my lady lodgers; and you, leandy; and mr. jauncy; and,
though last mentioned, not intentionally so, i assure you, miss
parkinson, my dear--i couldn't tell you how honoured i feel to see you
all sitting, so friendly and cheerful, round my humble table. i hope
this will be only the beginning of many more so; and i wish you all your
very good healths!"

"which, if i may answer for self and present company," said mr. jauncy,
nobody else being able to utter a word, "we drink and reciprocate."

leander was saved for the moment, and the dinner passed without further
incident. but his aunt's vein of sentiment had been opened, and could
not be staunched all at once; for when the cloth was removed, and the
decanters and dishes of oranges placed upon the table, she gave a little
preparatory cough and began again.

"i'm sure it isn't my wish to be ceremonial," she said; "but we're all
among friends--for i should like to look upon you as a friend, if you'll
let me," she added rather dubiously, to bella. "and i don't really think
there could be a better occasion for a sort of little ceremony that i've
quite set my heart on. leandy, _you_ know what i mean; and you've got it
with you, i know, because you were told to bring it with you."

"miss tweddle," interrupted matilda, hurriedly, "not now. i--i don't
think vidler has sent it back yet. i told you, you know"

"that's all you know about it, young lady," she said, archly; "for i
stepped in there yesterday and asked him about it, to make sure, and he
told me it was delivered over the very saturday afternoon before. so,
leandy, oblige me for once, and put it on the dear girl's finger before
us all; you needn't be bashful with us, i'm sure, either of you."

"what is all this?" asked mrs. collum.

"why, it's a ring, mrs. collum, ma'am, that belonged to my own dear
aunt, though she never wore it; and her grandfather had the posy
engraved on the inside of it. and i remember her telling me, before she
was taken, that she'd left it to me in her will, but i wasn't to let it
go out of the family. so i gave it to leandy, to be his engagement ring;
but it's had to be altered, because it was ever so much too large as it
was."

"i always thought," said mrs. collum, "that it was the gentleman's duty
to provide the ring."

"so leandy wanted to; but i said, 'you can pay for the altering; but i'm
fanciful about this, and i want to see dearest miss collum with my
aunt's ring on.'"

"oh, but, miss tweddle, can't you see?" said matilda. "he's forgotten
it; don't--don't tease him about it.... it must be for some other time,
that's all!"

"matilda, i'm surprised at you," said her mother. "to forget such a
thing as that would be unpardonable in _any_ young man. leander tweddle,
you _cannot_ have forgotten it."

"no," he said, "i've not forgotten it; but--but i haven't it about me,
and i don't know as i could lay my hand on it, just at present, and
that's the truth."

"_part_ of the truth," said bella. "oh, what deceitful things you men
are! leave me alone, james; i will speak. i won't sit by and hear poor
dear miss collum deceived in this way. miss collum, ask him if that is
all he knows about it. ask him, and see what he says."

"i'm quite satisfied with what he has chosen to say already, miss
parkinson; thank you," said matilda.

"then permit me to say, miss collum, that i'm truly sorry for you," said
bella.

"if you think so, miss parkinson, i suppose you must say so."

"i do say it," said bella; "for it's a sorrowful sight to see meekness
all run to poorness of spirit. you have a right to an explanation from
mr. tweddle there; and you would insist on it, if you wasn't afraid (and
with good reason) of the answer you'd get!"

at the beginning of this short colloquy miss tweddle, after growing very
red and restless for some moments, had slipped out of the room, and came
in now, trembling and out of breath, with a bonnet in her hand and a
cloak over her arm.

"miss parkinson," she said, speaking very rapidly, "when i asked you to
come here with my good friend and former lodger, i little thought that
anything but friendship would come of it; and sorry i am that it has
turned out otherwise. and my feelings to mr. jauncy are the same as
ever; but--this is your bonnet, miss parkinson, and your cloak. and this
is my house; and i shall be obliged if you'll kindly put on the ones,
and walk out of the other at once!"

bella burst into tears, and demanded from mr. jauncy why he had brought
her there to be insulted.

"you brought it all on yourself," he said, gloomily; "you should have
behaved!"

"what have i done," cried bella, "to be told to go, as if i wasn't fit
to stay?"

"i'll tell you what you've done," said miss tweddle. "you were asked
here with mr. jauncy to meet my dear leandy and his young lady, and get
all four of you to know one another, and lay foundations for
friendship's flowery bonds. and from the moment you came in, though i
paid no attention to it at first, you've done nothing but insinuate and
hint, and try all you could to set my dear miss collum and her ma
against my poor unoffending nephew; and i won't sit by any longer and
hear it. put on your bonnet and cloak, miss parkinson, and mr. jauncy
(who knows i don't bear him any ill-feeling, whatever happens) will go
home with you."

"i've said nothing," repeated bella, "but what i'd a right to say, and
what i'll stand to."

"if you don't put on those things," said jauncy, "i shall go away
myself, and leave you to follow as best you can."

"i'm putting them on," said bella; and her hands were unsteady with
passion as she tied her bonnet-strings. "don't bully _me_, james,
because i won't bear it! mr. tweddle, if you're a man, will you sit
there and tell me you don't know that that ring is on a certain person's
finger? will you do that?"

the miserable man concluded that ada had disregarded his entreaties, and
told her sister all about the ring and the accursed statue. he could not
see why the story should have so inflamed bella; but her temper was
always uncertain.

everybody was looking at him, and he was expected to say something. his
main idea was, that he would see how much bella knew before committing
himself.

"what have i ever done to offend you," he asked, "that you turn on me
in this downright vixenish manner? i scorn to reply to your
insinuations!"

"do you want me to speak out plain? james, stand away, _if_ you please.
you may all think what you choose of me. _i_ don't care! perhaps if
_you_ were to come in and find the man who, only a week ago, had offered
marriage to your youngest sister, figuring away as engaged to quite
another lady, _you_ wouldn't be all milk and honey, either. i'm doing
right to expose him. the man who'd deceive one would deceive many, and
so you'll find, miss collum, little as you think it."

"that's enough," said miss tweddle. "it's all a mistake, i'm sure, and
you'll be sorry some day for having made it. now go, miss parkinson, and
make no more mischief!"

a light had burst in upon leander's perturbed mind. ada had not broken
faith with him, after all. he remembered bella's conduct during the
return from rosherwich, and understood at last to what a mistake her
present wrath was due.

here, at all events, was an accusation he could repel with dignity, with
truth. foolish and unlucky he had been--and how unlucky he still hoped
matilda might never learn--but false he was not; and she should not be
allowed to believe it.

"miss parkinson," he said, "i've been badgered long enough. what is it
you're trying to bring up against me about your sister ada? speak it
out, and i'm ready to answer you."

"leander," said matilda, "i don't want to hear it from her. only you
tell me that you've been true to me, and that is quite enough."

"matilda, you're a foolish girl, and don't know what you're talking
about," said her mother. "it is not enough for _me_; so i beg, young
woman, if you've anything to accuse the man who's to be my son-in-law
of, you'll say it now, in my presence, and let him contradict it
afterwards if he can."

"will he contradict his knowing my sister ada, who's one of the ladies
at madame chenille's, in the edgware road, more than a twelvemonth
since, and paying her attentions?" asked bella.

"i don't deny," said leander, "meeting her several times, and being
considerably struck, in a quiet way. but that was before i met matilda."

"you had met matilda before last saturday, i suppose?" sneered bella,
spitefully--"when you laid your plans to join our party to rosherwich,
and trouble my poor sister, who'd given up thinking of you."

"there you go, bella!" said her _fiancé_. "what do you know about his
plans? he'd no idea as ada and you was to be there; and when i told him,
as we were driving down, it was all i could do to prevent him jumping
out of the cab."

"i'm highly flattered to hear it," said bella. "but he didn't seem to be
so afraid of ada when they did meet; and you best know, mr. tweddle, the
things you said to that poor trusting girl all the time you were walking
and dancing and talking foolishness to her."

"i never said a word that couldn't have been spoke from the top of st.
paul's," protested leander. "i did dance with her, i own, not to seem
uncivil; but we only waltzed round twice."

"then why did you give her a ring--an engagement ring too?" insisted
bella.

"who saw me give her a ring?" he demanded hotly. "do you dare to say you
did? did she ever tell you i gave her any ring? you _know_ she didn't!"

"if i can't trust my own ears," said bella, "i should like to know what
i can trust. i heard you myself, in that railway carriage, ask my sister
ada not to tell any one about some ring, and i tried to get out of ada
afterwards what the secret was; but she wouldn't treat me as a sister,
and be open with me. but any one with eyes in their head could guess
what was between you, and all the time you an engaged man!"

"see there, now!" cried the injured hairdresser; "there's a thing to go
and make all this mischief about! matilda, mrs. collum, aunt, i declare
to you i told the--the other young woman everything about my having
formed new ties and that. i was very particular not to give rise to
hopes which were only doomed to be disappointed. as to what miss
parkinson says she overheard, why, it's very likely i may have asked her
sister to say nothing about a ring, and i won't deny it was the very
same ring that i was to have brought here to-day; for the fact was, i
had the misfortune to lose it in those very gardens, and naturally did
not wish it talked about: and that's the truth, as i stand here. as for
giving it away, i swear i never parted with it to no mortal woman!"

"after that, bella," observed mr. jauncy, "you'd better say you're sorry
you spoke, and come home with me--that's what you'd better do."

"i shall say nothing of the sort," she asserted. "i'm too much of a lady
to stay where my company is not desired, and i'm ready to go as soon as
you please. but if he was to talk his head off, he would never persuade
me (whatever he may do other parties) that he's not been playing double;
and if ada were here you would soon see whether he would have the face
to deny it. so good-night, miss tweddle, and sooner or later you'll find
yourself undeceived in your precious nephew, take my word for it.
good-night, miss collum, and i'm only sorry you haven't more spirit than
to put up with such treatment. james, are you going to keep me waiting
any longer?"

mr. jauncy, with confused apologies to the company generally, hurried
his betrothed off, in no very amiable mood, and showed his sense of her
indiscretions by indulging in some very plain speaking on their homeward
way.

as the street door shut behind them, leander gave a deep sigh of relief.

"matilda, my own dearest girl," he said, "now that that cockatrice has
departed, tell me, you don't doubt your leander, do you?"

"no," said matilda, judicially, "i don't doubt you, leander, only i do
wish you'd been a little more open with me; you might have told me you
had gone to those gardens and lost the ring, instead of leaving me to
hear it from that girl."

"so i might, darling," he owned; "but i thought you'd disapprove."

"and if she's _my_ daughter," observed mrs. collum, "she _will_
disapprove."

but it was evident from matilda's manner that the inference was
incorrect; the relief of finding leander guiltless on the main count had
blinded her to all minor shortcomings, and he had the happiness of
knowing himself fully and freely forgiven.

if this could only have been the end! but, while he was still throbbing
with bliss, he heard a sound, at which his "bedded hair" started up and
stood on end--the ill-omened sound of a slow and heavy footfall.

"leandy," cried his aunt, "how strange you're looking!"

"there's some one in the passage," he said, hoarsely. "i'll go and see
her. don't any of you come out."

"why, it's only our jane," said his aunt; "she always treads heavy."

the steps were heard going up the stairs; then they seemed to pause
halfway, and descend again. "i'll be bound she's forgot something," said
miss tweddle. "i never knew such a head as that girl's;" and leander
began to be almost reassured.

the steps were heard in the adjoining room, which was shut off by
folding doors from the one they were occupying.

"leander," cried matilda, "what _can_ there be to look so frightened
of?" and as she spoke there came a sounding solemn blow upon the
folding-doors.

"i never saw the lady before in all my life!" moaned the guilty man,
before the doors had time to swing back; for he knew too well who stood
behind them.

and his foreboding was justified to the full. the doors yielded to the
blow, and, opening wide, revealed the tall and commanding figure of the
goddess; her face, thanks to leander's pigments, glowing lifelike under
her hood, and the gold ring gleaming on her outstretched hand.

"leander," said the goddess, in her low musical accents, "come away."

"upon my word!" cried mrs. collum. "_who_ is this person?"

he could not speak. there seemed to be a hammer beating on his brain,
reducing it to a pulp.

"perhaps," said miss tweddle--"perhaps, young lady, you'll explain what
you've come for?"

the statue slowly pointed to leander. "i come for him," she said
calmly. "he has vowed himself to me; he is mine!"

matilda, after staring, incredulous, for some moments at the intruder,
sank with a wild scream upon the sofa, and hid her face.

leander flew to her side. "matilda, my own," he implored, "don't be
alarmed. she won't touch _you_; it's _me_ she's come after."

matilda rose and repulsed him with a sudden energy. "how dare you!" she
cried, hysterically. "i see it all now: the ring, the--the cloak; _she_
has had them all the time!.... fool that i was--silly, trusting fool!"
and she broke out into violent hysterics.

"go away at once, hypocrite!" enjoined her mother, addressing the
distracted hairdresser, as he stood, dumb and impotent, before her. "do
you want to kill my poor child? take yourself off!"

"for goodness' sake, go, leandy," added his aunt. "i can't bear the
sight of you!"

"leander, i wait," said the statue. "come!"

he stood there a moment longer, looking blankly at the two elder women
as they bustled about the prostrate girl, and then he gave a bitter,
defiant laugh.

his fate was too strong for him. no one was in the mood to listen to any
explanation; it was all over! "i'm coming," he said to the goddess. "i
may as well; i'm not wanted here."

and, with a smothered curse, he dashed blindly from the room, and out
into the foggy street.

an appeal

xii.

"if you did know to whom i gave the ring,
if you did know for whom i gave the ring,
and how unwillingly i left the ring,
you would abate the strength of your displeasure."

_merchant of venice._

leander strode down the street in a whirl of conflicting emotions. at
the very moment when he seemed to have prevailed over miss parkinson's
machinations, his evil fate had stepped in and undone him for ever! what
would become of him without matilda? as he was thinking of his gloomy
prospects, he noticed, for the first time, that the statue was keeping
step by his side, and he turned on her with smothered rage. "well," he
began, "i hope you're satisfied?"

"quite, leander, quite satisfied; for have i not found you?"

"oh, you've found me right enough," he replied, with a groan--"trust you
for that! what i should like to know is, how the dickens you did it?"

"thus," she replied: "i awoke, and it was dark, and you were not there,
and i needed you; and i went forth, and called you by your name. and
you, now that you have hearkened to my call, you are happy, are you
not?"

"me?" said leander, grimly. "oh, i'm regular jolly, i am! haven't i
reason?"

"your sisters seemed alarmed at my coming," she said. "why?"

"well," said leander, "they aren't used to having marble goddesses
dropping in on them promiscuously."

"the youngest wept: was it because i took you from her side?"

"i shouldn't wonder," he returned gruffly. "don't bother me!"

when they were both safely within the little upper room again, he opened
the cupboard door wide. "now, marm," he said, in a voice which trembled
with repressed rage, "you must be tired with the exercise you've took
this evening, and i'll trouble you to walk in here."

"there are many things on which i would speak with you," she said.

"you must keep them for next time," he answered roughly. "if you can see
anything, you can see that just now i'm not in a temper for to stand it,
whatever i may be another evening."

"why do i suffer this language from you?" she demanded
indignantly--"why?"

"if you don't go in, you'll hear language you'll like still less,
goddess or no goddess!" he said, foaming. "i mean it. i've been worked
up past all bearing, and i advise you to let me alone just now, or
you'll repent it!"

"enough!" she said haughtily, and stalked proudly into the lonely niche,
which he closed instantly. as he did so, he noticed his sunday papers
lying still folded on his table, and seized one eagerly.

"it may have something in it about what jauncy was telling me of," he
said; and his search was rewarded by the following paragraph:--

"daring capture of burglars in bloomsbury.--on the night of friday, the
--th, police-constable yorke, b 954, while on duty, in the course of one
of his rounds, discovered two men, in a fainting condition and covered
with blood, which was apparently flowing from sundry wounds upon their
persons, lying against the railings of queen square. being unable to
give any coherent account of themselves, and housebreaking implements
being found in their possession, they were at once removed to the bow
street station, where, the charge having been entered against them, they
were recognized by a member of the force as two notorious housebreakers
who have long been 'wanted' in connection with the camberwell burglary,
in which, as will be remembered, an officer lost his life."

the paragraph went on to give their names and sundry other details, and
concluded with a sentence which plunged leander into fresh torments:--

"in spite of the usual caution, both prisoners insisted upon
volunteering a statement, the exact nature of which has not yet
transpired, but which is believed to have reference to another equally
mysterious outrage--the theft of the famous venus from the wricklesmarsh
collection--and is understood to divert suspicion into a hitherto
unsuspected channel."

what could this mean, if not that those villains, smarting under their
second failure, had denounced him in revenge? he tried to persuade
himself that the passage would bear any other construction, but not very
successfully. "if they have brought _me_ in," he thought, and it was his
only gleam of consolation, "i should have heard of it before this."

and even this gleam vanished as a sharp knocking was heard below; and,
descending to open the door, he found his visitor to be inspector
bilbow.

"evening, tweddle," said the inspector, quietly. "i've come to have
another little talk with you."

leander thought he would play his part till it became quite hopeless.
"proud to see you, mr. inspector," he said. "will you walk into my
saloon? and i'll light the gas for you."

"no, don't you trouble yourself," said the terrible man. "i'll walk
upstairs where you're sitting yourself, if you've no objections."

leander dared not make any, and he ushered the detective upstairs
accordingly.

"ha!" said the latter, throwing a quick eye round the little room. "nice
little crib you've got here. keep everything you want on the premises,
eh? find those cupboards very convenient, i dare say?"

"very," said leander (like the innocent joseph surface that he was);
"oh, very convenient, sir." he tried to keep his eyes from resting too
consciously upon the fatal door that held his secret.

"keep your coal and your wine and spirits there?" said the detective.
(was he watching his countenance, or not?)

"y--yes," said leander; "leastways, in one of them. will you take
anything, sir?"

"thank 'ee, tweddle; i don't mind if i do. and what do you keep in the
other one, now?"

"the other?" said the poor man. "oh, odd things!" (he certainly had
_one_ odd thing in it.)

after the officer had chosen and mixed his spirits and water, he began:
"now, you know what's brought me here, don't you?"

("if he was sure, he wouldn't try to pump me," argued leander. "i won't
throw up just yet.")

"i suppose it's the ring," he replied innocently. "you don't mean to say
you've got it back for me, mr. inspector? well, i _am_ glad."

"i thought you set no particular value on the ring when i met you last?"
said the other.

"why," said leander, "i may have said so out of politeness, not wanting
to trouble you; but, as you said it was the statue you were after
chiefly, why, i don't mind admitting that i shall be thankful indeed to
get that ring back. and so you've brought it, have you, sir?"

he said this so naturally, having called in all his powers of
dissimulation to help him in his extremity, that the detective was
favourably impressed. he had already felt a suspicion that he had been
sent here on a fool's errand, and no one could have looked less like a
daring criminal, and the trusted confederate of still more daring
ruffians, than did leander at that moment.

"heard anything of potter lately?" he asked, wishing to try the effect
of a sudden _coup_.

"i don't know the gentleman," said leander, firmly; for, after all, he
did not.

"now, take care. he's been seen to frequent this house. we know more
than you think, young man."

"oh! if he bluffs, _i_ can bluff too," passed through leander's mind.
"inspector bilbow," he said, "i give you my sacred honour, i've never
set eyes on him. he can't have been here, not with my knowledge. it's my
belief you're trying to make out something against me. if you're a
friend, inspector, you'll tell me straight out."

"that's not our way of doing business; and yet, hang it, i ought to know
an honest man by this time! tweddle, i'll drop the investigator, and
speak as man to man. you've been reported to me (never mind by whom) as
the receiver of the stolen venus--a pal of this very potter--that's what
i've against you, my man!"

"i know who told you that," said leander; "it was that count and his
precious friend braddle!"

"oh, you know them, do you? that's an odd guess for an innocent man,
tweddle!"

"they found me out from inquiries at the gardens," said leander; "and as
for guessing, it's in this very paper. so it's me they've gone and
implicated, have they? all right. i suppose they're men whose word you'd
go by, wouldn't you, sir--truthful, reliable kind of parties, eh?"

"none of that, tweddle," said the inspector, rather uneasily. "we
officers are bound to follow up any clue, no matter where it comes from.
i was informed that that venus is concealed somewhere about these
premises. it may be, or it may not be; but it's my duty to make the
proper investigations. if you were a prince of the blood, it would be
all the same."

"well, all i can say is, that i'm as innocent as my own toilet
preparations. ask yourself if it is likely. what could _i_ do with a
stolen statue--not to mention that i'm a respectable tradesman, with a
reputation to maintain? excuse me, but i'm afraid those burglars have
been 'aving a lark with you, sir."

he went just a little too far here, for the detective was visibly
irritated.

"don't chatter to me," he said. "if you're innocent, so much the better
for you; if that statue is found here after this, it will ruin you. if
you know anything, be it ever so little, about it, the best thing you
can do is to speak out while there's time."

"i can only say, once more, i'm as innocent as the drivelling snow,"
repeated leander. "why can't you believe my word against those
blackguards?"

"perhaps i do," said the other; "but i must make a formal look round, to
ease my conscience."

leander's composure nearly failed him. "by all means," he said at
length. "come and ease your conscience all over the house, sir, do; i
can show you over."

"softly," said the detective. "i'll begin here, and work gradually up,
and then down again."

"here?" said leander, aghast. "why, you've seen all there is there!"

"now, tweddle, i shall conduct this my own way, if _you_ please. i've
been following your eyes, tweddle, and they've told me tales. i'll
trouble you to open that cupboard you keep looking at so."

"this cupboard?" cried leander. "why, you don't suppose i've got the
venus in there, sir!"

"if it's anywhere, it's there! there's no taking me in, i tell you. open
it!"

"oh!" said leander, "it is hard to be the object of these cruel
suspicions. mr. inspector, listen to me. i can't open that cupboard, and
i'll tell you why.... you--you've been young yourself.... think how
you'd feel in my situation ... and consider _her_! as a gentleman, you
won't press it, i'm sure!"

"if i'm making any mistake, i shall know how to apologise," said the
inspector. "if you don't open that cupboard, _i_ shall."

"never!" exclaimed leander. "i'll die first!" and he threw himself upon
the handle.

the other caught him by the shoulders, and sent him twirling into the
opposite corner; and then, taking a key from his own pocket, he opened
the door himself.

"i--i never encouraged her!" whimpered leander, as he saw that all was
lost.

the officer had stepped back in silence from the cupboard; then he faced
leander, with a changed expression. "i suppose you think yourself
devilish sharp?" he said savagely; and leander discovered that the
cupboard was as bare as mother hubbard's!

he was not precisely surprised, except at first. "she's keeping out of
the way; she wouldn't be the goddess she is if she couldn't do a
trifling thing like that!" was all he thought of the phenomenon. he
forced himself to laugh a little.

"excuse me," he said, "but you did seem so set on detecting something
wrong, that i couldn't help humouring you!"

inspector bilbow was considerably out of humour, and gave leander to
understand that he would laugh in a certain obscure region, known as
"the other side of his face," by-and-by. "you take care, that's my
advice to you, young man. i've a deuced good mind to arrest you on
suspicion as it is!" he said hotly.

"lor', sir!" said leander, "what for--for not having anything in that
cupboard?"

"it's my belief you know more than you choose to tell. be that as it
may, i shall not take you into custody for the present; but you pay
attention to what i'm going to tell you next. don't you attempt to leave
this house, or to remove anything from it, till you see me again, and
that'll be some time to-morrow evening. if you do attempt it, you'll be
apprehended at once, for you're being watched. i tell you that for your
own sake, tweddle; for i've no wish to get you into trouble if you act
fairly by me. but mind you stay where you are for the next twenty-four
hours."

"and what's to happen then?" said leander.

"i mean to have the whole house thoroughly searched and you must be
ready to give us every assistance--that's what's to happen. i might make
a secret of it; but where's the use? if you're not a fool, you'll see
that it won't do to play any tricks. you'd far better stand by me than
potter."

"i tell you i don't know potter. _blow_ potter!" said leander, warmly.

"we shall see," was all the detective deigned to reply; "and just be
ready for my men to-morrow evening, or take the consequences. those are
my last words to you!"

and with this he took his leave. he was by no means the most brilliant
officer in the department, and he felt uncomfortably aware that he did
not see his way clear as yet. he could not even make up his mind on so
elementary a point as leander's guilt or innocence.

but he meant to take the course he had announced, and his frankness in
giving previous notice was not without calculation. he argued thus: if
tweddle was free from all complicity, nothing was lost by delaying the
search for a day; if he were guilty, he would be more than mortal if he
did not attempt, after such a warning, either to hide his booty more
securely, and probably leave traces which would betray him, or else to
escape when his guilt would be manifest.

unfortunately, there were circumstances in the case which he could not
be expected to know, and which made his logic inapplicable.

after he had gone, leander thrust his hands deep into his pockets, and
began to whistle forlornly. "a little while ago it was burglars--now
it's police!" he reflected aloud. "i'm going it, i am! and then there's
matilda and that there venus--one predickyment on top of another!" (but
here a sudden hope lightened his burden.) "suppose she's took herself
off for good?" he was prevented from indulging this any further by a
long, low laugh, which came from the closed cupboard.

"no such luck--she's back again!" he groaned. "oh, _come_ out if you
want to. don't stay larfin' at me in there!"

the goddess stepped out, with a smile of subdued mirth upon her lips.
"leander," she said, "did it surprise you just now that i had vanished?"

"oh," he said wearily, "i don't know--yes, i suppose so. you found some
way of getting through at the back, i dare say?"

"do you think that even now i cannot break through the petty restraints
of matter?"

"well, however it was managed, it was cleverly done. i must say that. i
didn't hardly expect it of you. but you must do the same to-morrow
night, mind you!"

"must i, indeed?" she said.

"yes, unless you want to ruin me altogether, you must. they're going to
search the premises _for you_!"

"i have heard all," she said. "but give yourself no anxiety: by that
time you and i will be beyond human reach."

"not me," he corrected. "if you think i'm going to let myself be wafted
over to cyprus (which is british soil now, let me tell you), you're
under a entire delusion. i've never been wafted anywhere yet, and i
don't mean to try it!"

all her pent-up wrath broke forth and descended upon him with crushing
force.

"meanest and most contemptible of mortal men, you shall recognize me as
the goddess i am! i have borne with you too long; it shall end this
night. shallow fool that you have been, to match your puny intellect
against a goddess famed for her wiles as for her beauty! you have
thought me simple and guileless; you have never feared to treat me with
disrespect; you have even dared to suppose that you could keep me--an
immortal--pent within these wretched walls! i humoured you; i let you
fool yourself with the notion that your will was free--your soul your
own. now that is over! consider the perils which encircle you.
everything has been aiding to drive you into these arms. my hour of
triumph is at hand--yield, then! cast yourself at my feet, and grovel
for pardon--for mercy--or assuredly i will spare you not!"

leander went down on all fours on the hearthrug. "mercy!" he cried,
feebly. "i've meant no offence. only tell me what you want of me."

"why should i tell you again? i demand the words from you which place
you within my power: speak them at once!"

("ah," thought leander, "i am not in her power as it is, then.") "if i
was to tell you once more that i couldn't undertake to say any such
words?" he asked aloud.

"then," she said, "my patience would be at an end, and i would scatter
your vile frame to the four winds of heaven!"

"lady venus," said leander, getting up with a white and desperate face,
"don't drive me into a corner. i can't go off, not at a moment's
notice--in either way! i--i must have a day--only a day--to make my
arrangements in. give me a day, lady venus; i ask it as a partickler
favour!"

"be it so," she said. "one day i give you in which to take leave of
such as may be dear to you; but, after that, i will listen to no further
pleadings. you are mine, and, all unworthy as you are, i shall hold you
to your pledge!"

leander was left with this terrible warning ringing in his ears: the
goddess would hold him to his involuntary pledge. even he could see that
it was pride, and not affection, which rendered her so determined; and
he trembled at the thought of placing himself irrevocably in her power.

but what was he to do? the alternative was too awful; and then, in
either case, he must lose matilda. here the recollection of how he had
left her came over him with a vivid force. what must she be thinking of
him at that moment? and who would ever tell her the truth, when he had
been spirited away for ever?

"oh, matilda!" he cried, "if you only knew the hidgeous position i'm
in--if you could only advise me what to do--i could bear it better!"

and then he resolved that he would ask that advice without delay, and
decide nothing until she replied. there was no reason for any further
concealment: she had seen the statue herself, and must know the worst.
what she could not know was his perfect innocence of any real
unfaithfulness to her, and that he must explain.

he sat up all night composing a letter that should touch her to the
heart, with the following result:--

"my own dearest girl,

"if such you will still allow me to qualify you, i write to you in
a state of mind that i really 'ardly know what i am about, but i
cannot indure making no effort to clear up the gaping abiss which
the events of the past fatal afternoon has raised betwixt us.

"in spite of all i could do, you have now seen, and been justly
alarmed at, the person with whom i allowed myself to become
involved in such a unhappy and unprecedented manner, and having
done so, you can think for yourself whether that art of stone was
able for to supplant yours for a single moment, though the way in
which such a hidgeous event transpired i can not trust my pen to
describe except in the remark that it was purely axidental. it all
appened on that ill-ominous saturday when we went down to those
gardens where my doom was saving up to lay in wait for me, and i
scorn to deny that bella's sister ada was one of the party. but as
to anything serous in that quarter, oh tilly the ole time i was
contrasting you with her and thinking how truly superior, and never
did i swerve not what could be termed a swerve for a instant. i did
dance arf a walz with her--but why? because she asked me to it and
as a gentleman i was bound to oblige! and that was afterwards too,
when i had put that ring on which is the sauce of all my recent
aggony. all the while i was dancing my thoughts were elsewhere--on
how i could get the ring back again, for so i still hoped i could,
though when i came to have a try, oh my dear girl no one couldn't
persuade her she's that obstinate, and yet unless i do it is all
over with me, and soon too!

"and now if it's the last time i shall ever write words with a
mortal pen, i must request your support in this dilemmer which is
sounding its dread orns at my very door!

"you know what she is and who she is, and you cannot doubt but what
she's a _goddess_ loath as you must feel to admit such a thing, and
i ask you if it would be downright wicked in me to do what she
tells me i must do. indeed i wont do it, being no less than flying
with her immediate to a distant climb, and you know how repugnant i
am to such a action--not if you advise me against it or even if you
was but to assure me your affections were unchanged in spite of
all! but you know we parted under pigulier circs, and i cannot
disgise from myself that you may be thinking wuss of me than what
matilda i can honestly say i deserve!

"now i tell you solimly that if this is the fact, and you've been
thinking of your proper pride and your womanly dignity and things
like that--there's _no time for to do it in_ matilda, if you don't
want to break with me for all eternity!

"for she's pressing me to carry out the pledge, as she calls it,
and i must decide before this time to-morrow, and i want to feel
you are not lost to me before i can support my trial, and what with
countless perplexities and burglars threatening, and giving false
informations, and police searching, there's no saying what i may do
nor what i mayn't do if i'm left to myself, for indeed i am very
unappy matilda, and if ever a man was made a victim through acting
without intentions, or if with, of the best--i am that party! o
matilda don't, don't desert me, unless you have seased to care for
me, and in that contingency i can look upon my fate whatever it be
with a apathy that will supply the courage which will not even
winch at its approach, but if i am still of value, come, and come
precious soon, or it will be too late to the asistance of

"your truly penitent and unfortunate

"leander tweddle.

"p.s.--you will see the condition of my feelings from my
spelling--i haven't the hart to spell."

dawn was breaking as he put the final touches to this appeal, and read
it over with a gloomy approbation. he had always cherished the
conviction that he could "write a good letter when he was put to it,"
and felt now that he had more than risen to the occasion.

"william shall take it down to bayswater the first thing to-morrow--no,
to-day, i mean," he said, rubbing his hot eyes. "i fancy it will do my
business!"

and it did.

the last straw

xiii.

"thou in justice,
if from the height of majesty we can
look down upon thy lowness and embrace it,
art bound with fervour to look up to me."

massinger, _roman actor._

haggard and distraught was leander as he went about his business that
morning, so mechanically that one customer, who had requested to have
his luxuriant locks "trimmed," found himself reduced to a state of penal
bullet-headedness before he could protest, and another sacrificed his
whiskers and part of one ear to the hairdresser's uninspired scissors.
for leander's eyes were constantly turning to the front part of his
shop, where his apprentice might come in at any moment with the answer
to his appeal.

at last the moment came when the bell fixed at the door sounded sharply,
and he saw the sleek head and chubby red face he had been so anxiously
expecting. he was busy with a customer; but that could not detain him
then, and he rushed quickly into the outer shop. "well, william," he
said, breathlessly, "a nice time you've been over that message! i gave
you the money for your 'bus."

"yusser, but it was this way: you said a green 'bus, and i took a green
'bus with 'bayswater' on it, and i didn't know nothing was wrong, and
when it stopped i sez to the conductor, 'this ain't kensington
gardings;' and he sez, 'no, it's archer street;' and i sez"

"never mind that now; you got to the shop, didn't you?"

"yes, i got to the shop, sir, and i see the lady; but i sez to that
conductor, 'you should ha' told me,' i sez"

"did she give you anything for me?" interrupted leander, impatiently.

"yessur," said the boy.

"then where the dooce is it?"

"'ere!" said william, and brought out an envelope, which his master tore
open with joy. it contained his own letter!

"william," he said unsteadily, "is this all?"

"ain't it enough, sir?" said the young scoundrel, who had guessed the
state of affairs, and felt an impish satisfaction at his employer's
rejection.

"none of that, william; d'ye hear me?" said leander. "william, i ain't
been a bad master to you. tell me, how did she take it?"

"well, she didn't seem to want to take it nohow at first," said the boy.
"i went up to the desk where she was a-sittin' and gave it her, and
by-and-by she opened it with the tips of her fingers, as if it would
bite, and read it all through very careful, and i could see her nose
going up gradual, and her colour coming, and then she sez to me, 'you
may go now, boy; there's no answer.' and i sez to her, 'if you please,
miss, master said as i was not to go away without a answer.' so she sez,
uncommon short and stiff, 'in that case he shall have it!'--like that,
she says, as proud as a queen, and she scribbles a line or two on it,
and throws it to me, and goes on casting up figgers."

"a line or two! where?" cried leander, and caught up the letter again.
yes, there on the last page was matilda's delicate commercial
handwriting, and the poor man read the cruel words, "_i have nothing to
advise; i give you up to your 'goddess'!_"

"very well, william," he said, with a deadly calm; "that's all. you
young devil! what are you a-sniggering at?" he added, with a sudden
outburst.

"on'y something i 'eard a boy say in the street, sir, going along, sir;
nothing to do with you, sir."

"oh, youth, youth!" muttered the poor broken man; "boys don't grow
feelings, any more than they grow whiskers!"

and he went back to his saloon, where he was instantly hailed with
reproaches from the abandoned customer.

"look here, sir! what do you mean by this? i told you i wanted to be
shaved, and you've soaped the top of my head and left it to cool!
what"--and he made use of expletives here--"what are you about?"

leander apologized on the ground of business of a pressing nature, but
the customer was not pacified.

"business, sir! your business is _here_: _i'm_ your business! and i come
to be shaved, and you soap the top of my head, and leave me all alone to
dry! it's scandalous! it's"

"look here, sir," interrupted leander, gloomily; "i've a good deal of
private trouble to put up with just now, without having _you_ going on
at me; so i must ask you not to 'arris me like this, or i don't know
what i might do, with a razor so 'andy!"

"that'll do!" said the customer, hastily. "i--i don't care about being
shaved this morning. wipe my head, and let me go; no, i'll wipe it
myself,--don't you trouble!" and he made for the door. "it's my belief,"
he said, pausing on the threshold for an instant, "that you're a
dangerous lunatic, sir; you ought to be shut up!"

"i dessay i shall have a mad doctor down on me after this," thought
leander; "but i shan't wait for _him_. no, it is all over now; the die
is fixed! cruel tillie! you have spoke the mandrake; you have thrust me
into the stony harms of that 'eathen goddess--always supposing the
police don't nip in fust, and get the start of her."

no more customers came that day, which was fortunate, perhaps, for them.
the afternoon passed, and dusk approached, but the hairdresser sat on,
motionless, in his darkening saloon, without the energy to light a
single gas-jet.

at last he roused himself sufficiently to go to the head of the stairs
leading to his "labatry," and call for william, who, it appeared, was
composing an egg-wash, after one of his employer's formulæ, and came up,
wondering to find the place in darkness.

"come here, william," said leander, solemnly. "i just want a few words
with you, and then you can go. i can do the shutting-up myself. william,
we can none of us foretell the future; and it may so 'appen that you are
looking on my face for the last time. if it should so be, william,
remember the words i am now about to speak, and lay them to 'art!...
this world is full of pitfalls; and some of us walk circumspect and keep
out of 'em, and some of us, william--some of us don't. if there's any
places more abounding in pitfalls than what others are, it is the
noxious localities known under the deceitful appellation of 'pleasure'
gardens. and you may take that as the voice of one calling to you from
the bottom of about as deep a 'ole as a mortal man ever plumped into.
and if ever you find a taste for statuary growing on you, william, keep
it down, wrastle with it, and don't encourage it. farewell, william! be
here at the usual time to-morrow, though whether you will find _me_ here
is more than i can say."

the boy went away, much impressed by so elaborate and formal a parting,
which seemed to him a sign that, in his parlance, "the guv'nor was going
to make a bolt of it."

leander busied himself in some melancholy preparations for his impending
departure, dissolution, or incarceration; he was not very clear which it
might be.

he went down and put his "labatry" in order. there he had worked with
all the fiery zeal of an inventor at the discoveries which were to
confer perpetual youth, in various sized bottles, upon a grateful world.
he must leave them all, with his work scarcely begun! another would step
in and perfect what he had left incomplete!

he came up again, with a heavy heart, and examined his till. there was
not much; enough, however, for william's wages and any small debts. he
made a list of these, and left it there with the coin. "they must settle
it among themselves," he thought, wearily; "i can't be bothered with
business now."

he was thinking whether it was worth while to shut the shop up or not;
when a clear voice sounded from above--

"leander, where art thou? come hither!"

and he started as if he had been shot. "i'm coming, madam," he called
up, obsequiously. "i'll be with you in one minute!"

"now for it," he thought, as he went up to his sitting-room. "i wish i
wasn't all of a twitter. i wish i knew what was coming next!"

the room was dark, but when he got a light he saw the statue standing in
the centre of the room, her hood thrown back, and the fur-lined mantle
hanging loosely about her; the face looked stern and terrible under its
brilliant tint.

"have you made your choice?" she demanded.

"choice!" he said. "i haven't any choice left me!"

"it is true," she said triumphantly. "your friends have deserted you;
mortals are banded together to seize and disgrace you: you have no
refuge but with me. but time is short. come, then, place yourself within
the shelter of these arms, and, while they enfold you tight in their
marble embrace, repeat after me the words which complete my power."

"there's no partickler hurry," he objected. "i will directly. i--i only
want to know what will happen when i've done it. you can't have any
objection to a natural curiosity like that."

"you will lose consciousness, to recover it in balmy cyprus, with
aphrodite (no longer cold marble, but the actual goddess, warm and
living), by your side! ah! impervious one, can you linger still? do you
not tremble with haste to feel my breath fanning your cheek, my soft arm
around your neck? are not your eyes already dazzled by the gleam of my
golden tresses?"

"well, i can't say they are; not at present," said leander. "and, you
see, it's all very well; but, as i asked you once before, how are you
going to _get_ me there? it's a long way, and i'm ten stone, if i'm an
ounce!"

"heavy-witted youth, it is not your body that will taste perennial
bliss."

"and what's to become of that, then?" he asked, anxiously.

"that will be left here, clasped to this stone, itself as cold and
lifeless."

"oh!" said leander, "i didn't bargain for that, and i don't like it."

"you will know nothing of it; you will be with me, in dreamy grottoes
strewn with fragrant rushes and the new-stript leaves of the vine, where
the warm air woos to repose with its languorous softness, and the water
as it wells murmurs its liquid laughter. ah! no greek would have
hesitated thus."

"well, i ain't a greek; and, as a business man, you can't be surprised
if i want to make sure it's a genuine thing, and worth the risk, before
i commit myself. i think i understand that it's the gold ring which is
to bind us two together?"

"it is," she said; "by that pure and noble metal are we united."

"well," said leander, "that being so, i should wish to have it tested,
else there might be a hitch somewhere or other."

"tested!" she cried; "what is that?"

"trying it, to see if it's real gold or not," he said. "we can easily
have it done."

"it is needless," she replied, haughtily. "i will not suffer my power to
be thus doubted, nor that of the pure and precious metal through which i
have obtained it!"

leander might have objected to this as an example of that obscure feat,
"begging the question;" for, whether the metal _was_ pure and precious,
was precisely the point he desired to ascertain. and this desire was
quite genuine; for, though he saw no other course before him but that
upon which the goddess insisted, he did wish to take every reasonable
precaution.

"for all i know," he reasoned in his own mind, "if there's anything
wrong with that ring, i may be left 'igh and dry, halfway to cyprus; or
she may get tired of me, and turn me out of those grottoes of hers! if i
must go with her, i should like to make things as safe as i could."

"it won't take long," he pleaded; "and if i find the ring's real gold, i
promise i won't hold out any longer."

"there is no time," she said, "to indulge this whim. would you mock me,
leander? ha! did i not say so? listen!"

the private bell was ringing loudly. leander rushed to the window, but
saw no one. then he heard the clang of the shop bell, as if the person
or persons had discovered that an entrance was possible there.

"the guards!" said the statue. "will you wait for them, leander?"

"no!" he cried. "never mind what i said about the ring; i'll risk that.
only--only, don't go away without me.... tell me what to say, and i'll
say it, and chance the consequences!"

"say, 'aphrodite, daughter of olympian zeus, i yield; i fulfil the
pledge; i am thine!'"

"well," he thought, "here goes. oh, matilda, you're responsible for
this!" and he advanced towards the white extended arms of the goddess.
there were hasty steps outside; another moment and the door would be
burst open.

"aphrodite, daughter of" he began, and recoiled suddenly; for he
heard his name called from without in a voice familiar and once dear to
him.

"leander, where are you? it's all dark! speak to me; tell me you've
done nothing rash! oh, leander, it's matilda!"

that voice, which a short while back he would have given the world to
hear once more, appalled him now. for if she came in, the goddess would
discover who she was, and then--he shuddered to think what might happen
then!

matilda's hand was actually on the door. "stop where you are!" he
shouted, in despair; "for mercy's sake, don't come in!"

"ah! you are there, and alive!" she cried. "i am not too late; and i
_will_ come in!"

and in another instant she burst into the room, and stood there, her
tear-stained face convulsed with the horror of finding him in such
company.

the thirteenth trump

xiv.

"your adversary having thus secured the lead with the last trump,
you will be powerless to prevent the bringing-in of the long suit."

rough's _guide to whist._

"what! thinkest thou that utterly in vain
jove is my sire, and in despite my will
that thou canst mock me with thy beauty still?"

_story of cupid and psyche._

leander, when he wrote his distracted appeal to matilda, took it for
granted that she had recognized the statue for something of a
supernatural order, and this, combined with his perplexed state of mind,
caused him to be less explicit than he might have been in referring to
the goddess's ill-timed appearance.

but, unfortunately, as will probably have been already anticipated, the
only result of this reticence was, that matilda saw in his letter an
abject entreaty for her consent to his marriage with ada parkinson, to
avoid legal proceedings, and, under this misapprehension, she wrote the
line that abandoned all claims upon him, and then went on with her
accounts, which were not so neatly kept that day as usual.

what she felt most keenly in leander's conduct was, that he should have
placed the ring, which to all intent was her own, upon the finger of
another. she could not bear to think of so unfeeling an act, and yet she
thought of it all through the long day, as she sat, outwardly serene, at
her high desk, while her attendants at her side made up sprays for
dances and wreaths for funerals from the same flowers.

and at last she felt herself urged to a course which, in her ordinary
mind, she would have shrunk from as a lowering of her personal dignity:
she would go and see her rival, and insist that this particular
humiliation should be spared her. the ring was not leander's to dispose
of--at least, to dispose of thus; it was not right that any but herself
should wear it; and, though the token could never now be devoted to its
rightful use, she wanted to save it from what, in her eyes, was a kind
of profanation.

she would not own it to herself, but there was a motive stronger than
all this--the desire to relieve her breast of some of the indignation
which was choking her, and of which her pride forbade any betrayal to
leander himself.

this other woman had supplanted her; but she should be made to feel the
wrong she had done, and her triumphs should be tempered with shame, if
she were capable of such a sensation. matilda knew very well that the
ring was not hers, and she wanted it no longer; but, then, it was miss
tweddle's, and she would claim it in her name.

she easily obtained permission to leave somewhat earlier that evening,
as she did not often ask such favours, and soon found herself at madame
chenille's establishment, where she remembered to have heard from bella
that her sister was employed.

she asked for the forewoman, and begged to be allowed to speak to miss
parkinson in private for a very few minutes; but the forewoman referred
her to the proprietress, who made objections: such a thing was never
permitted during business hours, the shop would close in an hour, till
then miss parkinson was engaged in the showroom, and so on.

but matilda carried her point at last, and was shown to a room in the
basement, where the assistants took their meals, there to wait until
miss parkinson could be spared from her duties.

matilda waited in the low, dingy room, where the tea-things were still
littering the table, and as she paced restlessly about, trying to feel
an interest in the long-discarded fashion-plates which adorned the
walls, her anger began to cool, and give place to something very like
nervousness.

she wished she had not come. what, after all, was she to say to this
girl when they met? and what was leander--base and unworthy as he had
shown himself--to her any longer? why should she care what he chose to
do with the ring? and he would be told of her visit, and thinkno!
that was intolerable: she would not gratify his vanity and humble
herself in this way. she would slip quietly out, and leave her rival to
enjoy her victory!

but, just as she was going to carry out this intention, the door opened,
and a short, dark young woman appeared. "i'm told there was a young
person asking to speak to me," she said; "i'm ada parkinson."

at the name, matilda's heart swelled again with the sense of her
injuries; and yet she was unprepared for the face that met her eyes.
surely her rival had both looked and spoken differently the night
before? and yet, she had been so agitated that very likely her
recollections were not to be depended upon.

"i--i did want to see you," she said, and her voice shook, as much from
timidity as righteous indignation. "when i tell you who i am, perhaps
you will guess why. i am matilda collum."

miss parkinson showed no symptoms of remorse. "what!" she cried, "the
young lady that mr. tweddle is courting? fancy!"

"after what happened last night," said matilda, trembling exceedingly,
"you know that that is all over. i didn't come to talk about that. if
you knew--and i think you must have known--all that mr. tweddle was to
me, you have--you have not behaved very well; but he is nothing to me
any more, and it is not worth while to be angry. only, i don't think you
ought to keep the ring--not _that_ ring!"

"goodness gracious me!" cried ada. "what in the world is all this about?
what ring oughtn't i to keep?"

"you know!" retorted matilda. "how can you pretend like that? the ring
he gave you that night at rosherwich!"

"the girl's mad!" exclaimed the other. "he never gave me a ring in all
his life! i wouldn't have taken it, if he'd asked me ever so. mr.
tweddle indeed!"

"why do you say that?" said matilda. "he has not got it himself, and
your sister said he gave it to you, and--and i saw it with my own eyes
on your hand!"

"oh, _dear_ me!" said ada, petulantly, holding out her hand, "look
there--is that it?--is this? well, these are all that i have, whether
you believe me or not; one belonged to my poor mother, and the other was
a present, only last friday, from the gentleman that's their head
traveller, next door, and is going to be my husband. is it likely that
i should be wearing any other now?--ask yourself!"

"you wouldn't wish to deceive me, i hope," said matilda; "and oh, miss
parkinson, you might be open with me, for i'm so very miserable! i don't
know what to think. tell me just this: did you--wasn't it you who came
last night to miss tweddle's?"

"no!" returned ada, impatiently--"no, as many times as you please! and
if bella likes to say i did, she may; and she always was a
mischief-making thing! how could i, when i didn't know there was any
miss tweddle to come to? and what do you suppose i should go running
about after mr. tweddle for? i wonder you're not ashamed to say such
things!"

"but," faltered matilda, "you did go to those gardens with him, didn't
you? and--and i know he gave the ring to somebody!"

ada began to laugh. "you're quite correct, miss collum," she said; "so
he did. don't you want to know who he gave it to?"

"yes," said matilda, "and you will tell me. i have a right to be told. i
was engaged to him, and the ring was given to him for me--not for any
one else. you _will_ tell me, miss parkinson, i am sure you will?"

"well," said ada, still laughing, "i'll tell you this much--she's a
foreign lady, very stiff and stuck-up and cold. she's got it, if any one
has. i saw him put it on myself!"

"tell me her name, if you know it."

"i see you won't be easy till you know all about it. her name's
afriddity, or froddity, or something outlandish like that. she lives at
rosherwich, a good deal in the open air, and--there, don't be
ridiculous--it's only a _statue_! there's a pretty thing to be jealous
of!"

"only a statue!" echoed matilda. "oh! heaven be with us both, if--if
that was it!"

certain sentences in the letter she had returned came to her mind with a
new and dreadful significance. the appearance of the visitor last
night--leander's terror--all seemed to point to some unsuspected
mystery.

"it can't be--no, it can't! miss parkinson, you were there: tell me all
that happened, quick! you don't know what may depend on it!"

"what! not satisfied even now?" cried ada. "_well_, miss collum, talk
about jealousy! but, there, i'll tell you all i know myself."

and she gave the whole account of the episode with the statue, so far as
she knew it, even to the conversation which led to the production of the
ring.

"you see," she concluded, "that it was all on your account that he tried
it on at all, and i'm sure he talked enough about you all the evening. i
really was a little surprised when i found _you_ were his miss collum.
(you won't mind my saying so?) if i was you, i should go and tell him i
forgave him, now. i do think he deserves it, poor little man!"

"yes, yes!" cried matilda; "i'll go--i'll go at once! thank you, miss
parkinson, for telling me what you have!" and then, as she remembered
some dark hints in leander's letter: "oh, i must make haste! he may be
going to do something desperate--he may have done it already!"

and, leaving miss parkinson to speculate as she pleased concerning her
eccentricity, she went out into the broad street again; and,
unaccustomed as she was to such expenditure, hailed a hansom; for there
was no time to be lost.

she had told the man to drive to the southampton row passage at first,
but, as she drew nearer, she changed her purpose; she did not like to go
alone, for who knew what she might see there? it was out of the question
to expect her mother to accompany her, but her friend and landlady would
not refuse to do so; and she drove to millman street, and prevailed on
miss tweddle to come with her without a moment's delay.

the two women found the shop dark, but unshuttered; there was a light in
the upper room. "you stay down here, please," said matilda; "if--if
anything is wrong, i will call you." and miss tweddle, without very well
understanding what it was all about, and feeling fluttered and out of
breath, was willing enough to sit down in the saloon and recover
herself.

and so it came to pass that matilda burst into the room just as the
hairdresser was preparing to pronounce the inevitable words that would
complete the goddess's power. he stood there, pale and dishevelled, with
eyes that were wild and bordered with red. opposite to him was the being
she had once mistaken for a fellow-creature.

too well she saw now that the tall and queenly form, with the fixed eyes
and cold tinted mask, was inspired by nothing human; and her heart died
within her as she gazed, spellbound, upon her formidable rival.

"leander," she murmured, supporting herself against the frame of the
door, "what are you going to do?"

"keep back, matilda!" he cried desperately; "go away--it's too late
now!"

a moment before, and, deserted as he believed himself to be by love and
fortune alike, he had been almost resigned to the strange and shadowy
future which lay before him; but now--now that he saw matilda there in
his room, no longer scornful or indifferent, but pale and concerned, her
pretty grey eyes dark and wide with anguish and fear for him--he felt
all he was giving up; he had a sudden revulsion, a violent repugnance to
his doom.

she loved him still! she had repented for some reason. oh! why had she
not done so before? what could he do now? for her own sake he must steel
himself to tell her to leave him to his fate; for he knew well that if
the goddess were to discover matilda's real relations to him, it might
cost his innocent darling her life!

for the moment he rose above his ordinary level. he lost all thought of
self. let aphrodite take him if she would, but matilda must be saved.
"go away!" he repeated; and his voice was cracked and harsh, under the
strain of doing such violence to his feelings. "can't you see
you're--you're not wanted? oh, do go away--while you can!"

matilda closed the door behind her. "do you think," she said, catching
her breath painfully, "that i shall go away and leave you with that!"

"leander," said the statue, "command your sister to depart!"

"i'm _not_ his"--matilda was beginning impetuously, till the hairdresser
stopped her.

"you _are_!" he cried. "you know you're my sister--you've forgotten it,
that's all.... don't say a syllable now, do you hear me? she's going,
lady venus, going directly!"

"indeed i'm not," said matilda, bravely.

"leave us, maiden!" said the statue. "your brother is yours no longer,
he is mine. know you who it is that commands? tremble then, nor oppose
the will of aphrodite of the radiant eyes!"

"i never heard of you before," said matilda, "but i'm not afraid of you.
and, whoever or whatever you are, you shall not take my leander away
against his will. do you hear? you could never be allowed to do that!"

the statue smiled with pitying scorn. "his own act has given me the
power i hold," she said, "and assuredly he shall not escape me!"

"listen," pleaded matilda; "perhaps you are not really wicked, it is
only that you don't know! the ring he put--without ever thinking what he
was doing--on your finger was meant for mine. it was, really! he is my
lover; give him back to me!"

"matilda!" shrieked the wretched man, "you don't know what you're doing.
run away, quick! do as i tell you!"

"so," said the goddess, turning upon him, "in this, too, you have tried
to deceive me! you have loved--you still love this maiden!"

"oh, not in that way!" he shouted, overcome by his terror for matilda.
"there's some mistake. you mustn't pay any attention to what she says:
she's excited. all my sisters get like that when they're excited--they'd
say _any_thing!"

"silence!" commanded the statue. "should not i have skill to read the
signs of love? this girl loves you with no sister's love. deny it not!"

leander felt that his position was becoming untenable; he could only
save matilda by a partial abandonment. "well, suppose she does," he
said, "i'm not obliged to return it, am i?"

matilda shrank back. "oh, leander!" she cried, with a piteous little
moan.

"you've brought it on yourself!" he said; "you will come here
interfering!"

"interfering!" she repeated wildly, "you call it that! how can i help
myself? am i to stand by and see you giving yourself up to, nobody can
tell what? as long as i have strength to move and breath to speak i
shall stay here, and beg and pray of you not to be so foolish and wicked
as to go away with her! how do you know where she will take you to?"

"cease this railing!" said the statue. "leander loves you not! away,
then, before i lay you dead at my feet!"

"leander," cried the poor girl, "tell me: it isn't true what she says?
you didn't mean it! you _do_ love me! you don't really want me to go
away?"

for her own sake he must be cruel; but he could scarcely speak the words
that were to drive her from his side for ever. "this--this lady," he
said, "speaks quite correct. i--i'd very much rather you went!"

she drew a deep sobbing breath. "i don't care for anything any more!"
she said, and faced the statue defiantly. "you say you can strike me
dead," she said: "i'm sure i hope you can! and the sooner the
better--for i will not leave this room!"

the dreamy smile still curved the statue's lips, in terrible contrast to
the inflexible purpose of her next words.

"you have called down your own destruction," she said, "and death shall
be yours!"

"stop a bit," cried leander, "mind what you're doing! do you think i'll
go with you if you touch a single hair of my poor tillie's head? why,
i'd sooner stay in prison all my life! see here," and he put his arm
round matilda's slight form; "if you crush her, you crush me--so now!"

"and if so," said the goddess, with cruel contempt, "are you of such
value in my sight that i should stay my hand? you, whom i have sought
but to manifest my power, for no softer feelings have you ever
inspired! and now, having withstood me for so long, you turn, even at
the moment of yielding, to yonder creature! and it is enough. i will
contend no longer for so mean a prize! slave and fool that you have
shown yourself, aphrodite rejects you in disdain!"

leander made no secret of his satisfaction at this. "now you talk
sense!" he cried. "i always told you we weren't suited. tillie, do you
hear? she gives me up! she gives me up!"

"aye," she continued, "i need you not. upon you and the maiden by your
side i invoke a speedy and terrible destruction, which, ere you can
attempt to flee, shall surely overtake you!"

leander was so overcome by this highly unexpected sentence that he lost
all control over his limbs; he could only stand where he was, supporting
matilda, and stare at the goddess in fascinated dismay.

the goddess was raising both hands, palm upwards, to the ceiling, and
presently she began to chant in a thrilling monotone: "hear, o zeus,
that sittest on high, delighting in the thunder, hear the prayer of thy
daughter, aphrodite the peerless, as she calleth upon thee, nor suffer
her to be set at nought with impunity! rise now, i beseech thee, and
hurl with thine unerring hand a blazing bolt that shall consume these
presumptuous insects to a smoking cinder! blast them, sire, with the
fire-wreaths of thy lightning! blast, and spare not!"

"kiss me, tillie, and shut your eyes," said leander; "it's coming!"

she was nestling close against him, and could not repress a faint
shivering moan. "i don't mind, now we're together," she whispered, "if
only it won't hurt much!"

the prayer uttered with such deadly intensity had almost ceased to
vibrate in their ears, but still the answer tarried; it tarried so long
that leander lost patience, and ventured to open his eyes a little way.
he saw the goddess standing there, with a strained expectation on her
upturned face.

"i don't wish to hurry you, mum," he said tremulously; "but you ought to
be above torturing us. might i ask you to request your--your relation to
look sharp with that thunderbolt?"

"zeus!" cried the goddess, and her accent was more acute, "thou hast
heard--thou wilt not shame me thus! must i go unavenged?"

still nothing whatever happened, until at last even matilda unclosed her
eyes. "leander!" she cried, with a hysterical little laugh, "_i don't
believe she can do it!_"

"no more don't i!" said the hairdresser, withdrawing his arm, and coming
forward boldly. "now look here, lady venus," he remarked, "it's time
there was an end of this, one way or the other; we can't be kept up here
all night, waiting till it suits your mr. zooce to make cockshies of us.
either let him do it now, or let it alone!"

the statue's face seemed to be illumined by a stronger light. "zeus, i
thank thee!" she exclaimed, clasping her pale hands above her head; "i
am answered! i am answered!"

and, as she spoke, a dull ominous rumble was heard in the distance.

"matilda, here!" cried the terrified hairdresser, running back to his
betrothed; "keep close to me. it's all over this time!"

the rumble increased to a roll, which became a clanking rattle, and
then lessened again to a roll, died away to the original rumble, and was
heard no more.

leander breathed again. "to think of my being taken in like that!" he
cried. "why, it's only a van out in the street! it's no good, mum; you
can't work it: you'd better give it up!"

the goddess seemed to feel this herself, for she was wringing her hands
with a low wail of despair. "is there none to hear?" she lamented. "are
they all gone--all? then is aphrodite fallen indeed; deserted of the
gods, her kinsmen; forgotten of mortals; braved and mocked by such as
these! woe! woe! for olympus in ruins, and time the dethroner of
deities!"

leander would hardly have been himself if he had forborne to take
advantage of her discomfiture. "you see, mum," he said, "you're not
everybody. you mustn't expect to have everything your own way down here.
we're in the nineteenth century nowadays, mum, and there's another
religion come in since you were the fashion!"

"_don't_, leander!" said matilda, in an undertone; "let her alone, the
poor thing!"

she seemed to have quite forgotten that her fallen enemy had been
dooming her to destruction the moment before; but there was something so
tragic and moving in the sight of such despair that no true woman could
be indifferent to it.

either the taunt or the compassion, however, roused the goddess to a
frenzy of passion. "hold your peace!" she said fiercely, and strode down
upon leander until he beat an instinctive retreat. "fallen as i am, i
will not brook your mean vauntings or insolent pity! shorn i may be of
my ancient power, but something of my divinity clings to me still.
vengeance is not wholly denied to me! why should i not deal with you
even as with those profane wretches who laid impious hands upon this my
effigy? why? why?"

leander began to feel uncomfortable again. "if i've said anything you
object to," he said hastily, "i'll apologise. i will--and so will
matilda--freely and full; in writing, if that will satisfy you!"

"tremble not for your worthless bodies," she said; "had you been slain,
as i purposed, you would but have escaped me, after all! now a vengeance
keener and more enduring shall be mine! in your gross blindness, you
have dared to turn from divine aphrodite to such a thing as this, and
for your impiety you shall suffer! this is your doom, and so much at
least i can still accomplish: long as you both may live, strong as your
love may endure, never again shall you see her alone, never more shall
she be folded to your breast! for ever, i will stand a barrier between
you: so shall your days consume away in the torturing desire for a
felicity you may never attain!"

"it seems to me, tillie," said leander, looking round at her with hollow
eyes, "that we may as well give up keeping company together, after
that!"

matilda had been weeping quietly. "oh no, leander, not that! don't let
us give each other up: we may--we may get used to it!"

"that is not all," said the revengeful goddess. "i understand but little
of the ways of this degenerate age. but one thing i know: this very
night, guards are on their way to search this abode for the image in
which i have chosen to reveal myself; and, should they find that they
are in search of, you will be dragged to some dungeon, and suffer
deserved ignominy. it pleased me yesternight to shield you: to-night,
be very sure that this marble form shall not escape their vigilance!"

he felt at once that this, at least, was no idle threat. the police
might arrive at any instant; she had only to vacate the marble at the
moment of their entry--and what could he do? how could he explain its
presence? the gates of portland or dartmoor were already yawning to
receive him! was it too late, even then, to retrieve the situation? "if
it wasn't for tillie, i could see my way to something, even now," he
thought. "i can but try!"

"lady venus," he began, clearing his throat, "it's not my desire to be
the architect of any mutual unpleasantness--anything but! i don't see
any use in denying that you've got the best of it. i'm done--reg'lar
bowled over; and if ever there was a poor devil of a toad under a
harrer, i've no hesitation in admitting that toad's me! so the only
point i should like to submit for your consideration is this: have
things gone too far? are you quite sure you won't be spiting yourself as
well as me over this business? can't we come to an amicable arrangement?
think it over!"

"leander, you can't mean it!" cried matilda.

"you leave me alone," he said hoarsely; "i know what i'm saying!"

whether the goddess had overstated her indifference, or whether she may
have seen a prospect of some still subtler revenge, she certainly did
not receive this proposition of leander's with the contumely that might
have been expected; on the contrary, she smiled with a triumphant
satisfaction that betrayed a disposition to treat.

"have my words been fulfilled, then?" she asked. "is your insolent pride
humbled at last? and do you sue to me for the very favours you so long
have spurned?"

"you can put it that way if you like," he said doggedly. "if you want
me, you'd better say so while there's time, that's all!"

"little have you merited such leniency," she said; "and yet, it is to
you i owe my return to life and consciousness. shall i abandon what i
have taken such pains to win? no! i accept your submission. speak, then,
the words of surrender, and let us depart together!"

"before i do that," he said firmly, "there's one point i must have
settled to my satisfaction."

"you can bargain still!" she exclaimed haughtily. "are all barbers like
you? if your point concerns the safety of this maiden, be at ease; she
shall go unharmed, for she is my rival no longer!"

"well, it wasn't that exactly," he explained; "but i'm doubtful about
that ring being the genuine article, and i want to make sure."

"but a short time since, and you were willing to trust all to me!"

"i was; but, if i may take the liberty of observing so, things were
different then. you were wrong about that thunderbolt--you may be wrong
about the ring!"

"fool!" she said, "how know you that the quality of the token concerns
my power? were it even of unworthy metal, has it not brought me hither?"

"yes," he said, "but it mightn't be strong enough to pass _me_ the whole
distance, and where should i be then? it don't look more to me than 15
carat, and i daren't run any extra risk."

"how, then, can your doubts be set at rest?" she demanded.

"easy," he replied: "there are men who understand these things. all i
ask of you is to step over with me, and see one of them, and take his
opinion; and if he says it's gold--why, then i shall know where i am!"

"aphrodite submit her claims to the judgment of a mortal!" she cried.
"never will i thus debase myself!"

"very well," he said, "then we must stay where we are. all i can say is,
i've made you a fair offer."

she paused. "why not?" she said dreamily, as if thinking aloud. "have
not i sued ere this for the decision of a shepherd judge--even of paris?
'tis but one last indignity, and then--he is mine indeed! leander," she
added graciously, "it shall be as you will. lead the way; i follow!"

but matilda, who had been listening to this compromise with incredulous
horror, clung in desperation to her lover's arm, and sought to impede
his flight. "leander!" she cried, "oh, leander! surely you won't be mad
enough to go away with her! you won't be so wicked and sinful as that!
remember who she is: one of the false gods of the poor benighted
heathens--she owned it herself! she's nothing less than a live idol!
think of all the times we've been to chapel together; think of your dear
aunt, and how she'll feel your being in such awful company! let the
police come, and think what they like: we'll tell them the truth, and
make them believe it. only be brave, and stay here with me; don't let
her ensnare you! have some pity for me; for, if you leave me, i shall
die!"

"already the guards are at your gates," said the statue; "choose
quickly--while you may!"

he put matilda gently from him: "tillie," he said, with a convulsive
effort to remain calm, "you gave me up of your own free will--you know
that--and now you've come round too late. the other lady spoke first!"

as she still clung to him, he tried to whisper some last words of a
consoling or reassuring nature, and she suddenly relaxed her grasp, and
allowed him to make his escape without further dissuasion--not that his
arguments had reconciled her to his departure, but because she was
mercifully unaware of it.

the odd trick

xv.

"o heart of stone, are you flesh, and caught
by that you swore to withstand?"

_maud._

outside on the stairs leander suddenly remembered that his purpose
might be as far as ever from being accomplished. the house was being
watched: to be seen leaving it would procure his instant arrest.

hastily excusing himself to the goddess, he rushed down to his
laboratory, where he knew there was a magnificent beard and moustache
which he had been constructing for some amateur theatricals. with these,
and a soft felt hat, he completed a disguise in which he flattered
himself he was unrecognisable.

the goddess, however, penetrated it as soon as he rejoined her. "why
have you thus transformed yourself?" she inquired coldly.

"because," explained leander, "seeing the police are all on the look-out
for me, i thought it couldn't do any harm."

"it is useless!" she returned.

"to be sure," he agreed blankly, "they'll expect me to go out disguised.
if only they aren't up to the way out by the back! that's our only
chance now."

"leave all to me," she replied calmly; "with aphrodite you are safe."

and he never did quite understand how that strange elopement was
effected, or even remember whether they left the house from the front or
rear. the statue glided swiftly on, and, grasping a corner of her robe,
he followed, with only the vaguest sense of obstacles overcome and
passed as in a dream.

by the time he had completely regained his senses he was in a crowded
thoroughfare, which he recognised as the gray's inn road.

a certain scheme from which, desperate as it was, he hoped much, might
be executed as well here as elsewhere, and he looked about him for the
aid on which he counted.

"where, then, lives the wise man whom you would consult?" said
aphrodite.

leander went on until he could see the coloured lights of a chemist's
window, and then he said, "there--right opposite!"

he felt strangely nervous himself, but the goddess seemed even more so.
she hung back all at once, and clutched his arm in her marble grasp.

"leander," she said, "i will not go! see those liquid fires glowing in
lurid hues, like the eyes of some dread monster! this test of yours is
needless, and i fear it."

"lady venus," he said earnestly, "i do assure you they're only big
bottles, and quite harmless too, having water in them, not physic.
you've no call to be alarmed."

she yielded, and they crossed the road. the shop was small and
unpretending. in the window the chief ornaments were speckled plaster
limbs clad in elastic socks, and photographs of hideous complaints
before and after treatment with a celebrated ointment; and there were
certain trophies which indicated that the chemist numbered dentistry
among his accomplishments.

inside, the odour of drugs prevailed, in the absence of the subtle
perfume that is part of the fittings of a fashionable apothecary, and on
the very threshold the goddess paused irresolute.

"there is magic in the air," she exclaimed, "and fearful poisons. this
man is some enchanter!"

"now i put it to you," said leander, with some impatience, "does he
_look_ it?"

the chemist was a mild little man, with a high forehead, round
spectacles, a little red beak of a nose, and a weak grey beard. as they
entered, he was addressing a small and draggled child from behind his
counter. "go back and tell your mother," he said, "that she must come
herself. i never sell paregoric to children."

there was so little of the wizard in his manner that the goddess, who
possibly had some reason to mistrust a mortal magician, was reassured.

as the child retired, the chemist turned to them with a look of bland
and dignified inquiry (something, perhaps the consciousness of having
once passed an examination, sustains the meekest chemist in an inward
superiority). he did not speak.

leander took it upon himself to explain. "this lady would be glad to be
told whether a ring she's got on is the real article or only imitation,"
he said, "so she thought you could decide it for her."

"not so," corrected the goddess, austerely. "for myself i care not!"

"have it your own way!" said leander. "_i_ should like to be told, then.
i suppose, mister, you've some way of testing these things?"

"oh yes," said the chemist; "i can treat it for you with what we call
_aquafortis_, a combination of nitric and hydrochloric acid, which would
tell us at once. i ought to mention, perhaps, that so extremely powerful
an agent may injure the appearance of the metal if it is of inferior
quality. will the lady oblige me with the ring?"

aphrodite extended her hand with haughty indifference. the chemist
examined the ring as it circled her finger, and leander held his breath
in tortures of anxiety. a horrible fear came over him that his deep-laid
scheme was about to end in failure.

but the chemist remarked at last: "exactly; thank you, madam. the gold
is antique, certainly; but i should be inclined to pronounce it, at
first sight, genuine. i will ascertain how this is, if you will take the
trouble to remove the ring and pass it over!"

"why?" demanded aphrodite, obstinately.

"i could not undertake to treat it while it remains upon your hand," he
protested. "the acid might do some injury!"

"it matters not!" she said calmly; and leander recollected with horror
that, as any injury to her statue would have no physical effect upon the
goddess herself, she could not be much influenced by the chemist's
reason.

"do what the gentleman tells you," he said, in an eager whisper, as he
drew her aside.

"i know your wiles, o perfidious one," she said. "having induced me to
remove this token, you would seize it yourself, and take to flight! i
will not remove this ring!"

"there's a thing to say!" said leander; "there's a suspicion to throw
against a man! if you think i'm likely to do that, i'll go right over
here, where i can't even see it, and i won't stir out till it's all
over. will that satisfy you? you know why i'm so anxious about that
ring; and now, when the gentleman tells you he's almost sure it's
gold"

"it _is_ gold!" said the goddess.

"if you're so sure about it," he retaliated, "why are you afraid to have
it proved?"

"i am not afraid," she said; "but i require no proof!"

"i do," he retorted, "and what i told you before i stand to. if that
ring is proved--in the only way it can be proved, i mean, by this
gentleman testing it as he tells you he can--then there's no more to be
said, and i'll go away with you like a lamb. but without that proof i
won't stir a step, and so i tell you. it won't take a moment. you can
see for yourself that i couldn't possibly catch up the ring from here!"

"swear to me," she said, "that you will remain where you now stand; and
remember," she added, with an accent of triumph, "our compact is that,
should yonder man pronounce that the ring has passed through the test
with honour, you will follow me whithersoever i bid you!"

"you have only to lead the way," he said, "and i promise you faithfully
i'll follow."

goddesses may be credited with some knowledge of the precious metals,
and aphrodite had no doubt of the result of the chemist's
investigations. so it was with an air of serene anticipation that she
left leander upon this, and advanced to the chemist's counter.

"prove it now," she said, "quickly, that i may go!"

the chemist, who had been waiting in considerable bewilderment, prepared
himself to receive the ring, and leander, keeping his distance, felt his
heart beating fast as aphrodite slowly drew the token from her finger,
and placed it in the chemist's outstretched hand.

scarcely had she done so, as the chemist was retiring with the ring to
one of his lamps, before the goddess seemed suddenly aware that she had
committed a fatal error.

she made a stride forward to follow and recover it; but, as if some
unseen force was restraining her, she stopped short, and a rush of
whirling words, in some tongue unknown both to leander and the chemist,
forced its way through lips that smiled still, though they were freezing
fast.

then, with a strange hoarse cry of baffled desire and revenge, she
succeeded, by a violent effort, in turning, and bore down with
tremendous force upon the cowering hairdresser, who gave himself up at
once for lost.

but the marble was already incapable of obeying her will. within a few
paces from him the statue stopped for the last time, with an abruptness
that left it quivering and rocking. a greyish hue came over the face,
causing the borrowed tints to stand forth, crude and glaring; the arms
waved wildly and impotently once or twice, and then grew still for ever,
in the attitude conceived long since by the grecian sculptor!

leander was free! his hazardous experiment had succeeded. as it was the
ring which had brought the passionate, imperious goddess into her marble
counterfeit, so--the ring once withdrawn--her power was instantly at an
end, and the spell which had enabled her to assume a form of stone was
broken.

he had hoped for this, had counted upon it, but even yet hardly dared to
believe in his deliverance.

he had not done with it yet, however; for he would have to get the
statue out of that shop, and abandon it in some manner which would not
compromise himself, and it is by no means an easy matter to mislay a
life-size and invaluable antique without attracting an inconvenient
amount of attention.

the chemist, who had been staring meanwhile in blank astonishment, now
looked inquiringly at leander, who looked helplessly at him.

at last the latter, unable to be silent any longer, said, "the lady
seems unwell, sir."

"why," leander admitted, "she does appear a little out of sorts."

"has she had these attacks before, do you happen to know?"

"she's more often like this than not," said leander.

"dear me, sir; but that's very serious. is there nothing that gives
relief?--a little sal volatile, now? does the lady carry smelling salts?
if not, i could" and the chemist made an offer to come from behind
his counter to examine the strange patient.

"no," said leander, hastily. "don't you trouble--you leave her to me. i
know how to manage her. when she's rigid like this, she can't bear to be
taken notice of."

he was wondering all the time how he was to get away with her, until the
chemist, who seemed at least as anxious for her departure, suggested the
answer: "i should imagine the poor lady would be best at home. shall i
send out for a cab?" he asked.

"yes," said leander, gratefully; "bring a hansom. she'll come round
better in the open air;" for he had his doubts whether the statue could
be stowed inside a four-wheeler.

"i'll go myself," said the obliging man; "my assistant's out. perhaps
the lady will sit down till the cab comes?"

"thanks," said leander; "but when she's like this, she's been
recommended to stand."

the chemist ran out bare-headed, to return presently with a cab and a
small train of interested observers. he offered the statue his arm to
the cab-door, an attention which was naturally ignored.

"we shall have to carry her there," said leander.

"why, bless me, sir," said the chemist, as he helped to lift her,
"she--she's surprisingly heavy!"

"yes," gasped leander, over her unconscious shoulder; "when she goes off
in one of these sleeps, she does sleep very heavy"--an explanation
which, if obscure, was accepted by the other as part of the general
strangeness of the case.

on the threshold the chemist stopped again. "i'd almost forgotten the
ring," he said.

"_i'll_ take that!" said leander.

"excuse me," was the objection, "but i was to give it back to the lady
herself. had i not better put it on her finger, don't you think?"

"are you a married man?" asked leander, grimly.

"yes," said the chemist.

"then, if you'll take my advice, i wouldn't if i was you--if you're at
all anxious to keep out of trouble. you'd better give the ring to me,
and i give you my word of honour as a gentleman that i'll give it back
to her as soon as ever she's well enough to ask for it."

the other adopted the advice, and, amidst the sympathy of the
bystanders, they got the statue into the cab.

"where to?" asked the man through the trap.

"charing cross," said leander, at random; he ought the drive would give
him time for reflection.

"the 'orspital, eh?" said the cabman, and drove off, leaving the mild
chemist to stare open-mouthed on the pavement for a moment, and go back
to his shop with a growing sense that he had had a very unusual
experience.

now that leander was alone in the cab with the statue, whose attitude
required space, and cramped him uncomfortably, he wondered more and more
what he was to do with it. he could not afford to drive about london for
ever with her; he dared not take her home; and he was afraid of being
seen with her!

all at once he seemed to see a way out of his difficulty. his first step
was to do what he could, in the constantly varying light, to reduce the
statue to its normal state. he removed the curls which had disfigured
her classical brow, and, with his pocket-handkerchief, rubbed most of
the colour from her face; then the cloak had only to be torn off, and
all that could betray him was gone.

near charing cross, leander told the driver to take him down parliament
street, and stop at the entrance to scotland yard; there the cabman, at
leander's request, descended, and stared to find him huddled up under
the gleaming pale arms of a statue.

"guv'nor," he remarked, "that warn't the fare i took up, i'll take my
dying oath!"

"it's all right," said leander. "now, i tell you what i want you to do:
go straight in through the archway, find a policeman, and say there's a
gentleman in your cab that's found a valuable article that's been
missing, and wants assistance in bringing it in. i'll take care of the
cab, and here's double fare for your trouble."

"and wuth it, too," was the cabman's comment, as he departed on his
mission. "i thought it was the devil i was a drivin', we was that down
on the orfside!"

it was no part of leander's programme to wait for his return; he threw
the cloak over his arm, pocketed his beard, and slipped out of the cab
and across the road to a spot whence he could watch unseen. and when he
had seen the cabman come with two constables, he felt assured that his
burden was in safe hands at last, and returned to southampton row as
quickly as the next hansom he hailed could take him.

he entered his house by the back entrance: it was unguarded; and
although he listened long at the foot of the stairs, he heard nothing.
had the inspector not come yet, or was there a trap? as he went on, he
fancied there were sounds in his sitting-room, and went up to the door
and listened nervously before entering in.

"oh, miss collum, my poor dear!" a tremulous voice, which he recognised
as his aunt's, was saying, "for mercy's sake, don't lie there like that!
she's dying!--and it's my fault for letting her come here!--and what am
i to say to her ma?"

leander had heard enough; he burst in, with a white, horror-stricken
face. yes, it was too true! matilda was lying back in his crazy
armchair, her eyes fast closed, her lips parted.

"aunt," he said with difficulty, "she's not--not _dead_?"

"if she is not," returned his aunt, "it's no thanks to you, leandy
tweddle! go away; you can do no good to her now!"

"not till i've heard her speak," cried tweddle. "tillie, don't you
hear?--it's me!"

to his immense relief, she opened her eyes at the sound of his voice,
and turned away with a feeble gesture of fear and avoidance. "you have
come back!" she moaned, "and with her! oh, keep her away!... i can't
bear it all over again!... i can't!"

he threw himself down by her chair, and drew down the hands in which she
had hidden her face. "matilda, my poor, hardly-used darling!" he said,
"i've come back _alone_! i've got rid of her, tillie! i'm free; and
there's no one to stand between us any more!"

she pushed back her disordered fair hair, and looked at him with sweet,
troubled eyes. "but you went away with her--for ever?" she said. "you
said you didn't love me any longer. i heard you ... it was just
before" and she shuddered at the recollection.

"i know," said leander, soothingly. "i was obligated to speak harsh, to
deceive the--the other party, tillie. i tried to tell you, quiet-like,
that you wasn't to mind; but you wouldn't take no notice. but there, we
won't talk about it any more, so long as you forgive me; and you do,
don't you?"

she hid her face against his shoulder, in answer, from which he drew a
favourable conclusion; but miss tweddle was not so easily pacified.

"and is this all the explanation you're going to give," she demanded,
"for treating this poor child the way you've done, and neglecting her
shameful like this? if she's satisfied, leandy, i'm not."

"i can't help it, aunt," he said. "i've been true to tillie all the way
through, in spite of all appearances to the contrary--as she knows now.
and the more i explained, the less you'd understand about it; so we'll
leave things where they are. but i've got back the ring, and now you
shall see me put it on her finger."

*       *       *       *       *

it seemed that leander had driven to scotland yard just in time to save
himself, for the inspector did not make his threatened search that
evening.

two or three days later, however, to leander's secret alarm, he entered
the shop. after all, he felt, it was hopeless to think of deceiving
these sleuth-hounds of the law: this detective had been making
inquiries, and identified him as the man who had shared the hansom with
that statue!

his knees trembled as he stood behind his glass-topped counter. "come to
make the search, sir?" he said, as cheerfully as he could. "you'll find
us ready for you."

"well," said inspector bilbow, with a queer mixture of awkwardness and
complacency, "no, not exactly. tweddle, my good fellow, circumstances
have recently assumed a shape that renders a search unnecessary, as
perhaps you are aware?"

he looked very hard at tweddle as he spoke, and the hairdresser felt
that this was a crucial moment--the detective was still uncertain
whether he had been mixed up with the affair or not. leander's faculty
of ready wit served him better here than on past occasions.

"aware? no, sir!" he said, with admirable simplicity. "then that's why
you didn't come the other evening! i sat up for you, sir; all night i
sat up."

"the fact of the matter is, tweddle," said bilbow, who had become
suddenly affable and condescending, "i found myself reduced, so to
speak, to make use of you as a false clue, if you catch my meaning?"

"i can't say i do quite understand, sir."

"i mean--of course, i saw with half an eye, bless your soul, that you'd
had nothing to do with it--it wasn't likely that a poor chap like you
had any knowledge of a big plant of that description. no, no; don't you
go away with that idea. i never associated you with it for a single
instant."

"i'm truly glad to hear it, mr. inspector," said leander.

"it was owing to the line i took up. there were the real parties to put
off their guard, and to do that, tweddle--to do that, it was necessary
to appear to suspect you. d'ye see?"

"i think it was a little hard on me, sir," he said; "for being suspected
like that hurts a man's feelings, sir. i did feel wounded to have that
cast up against me!"

"well, well," said the inspector, "we'll go into that later. but, to go
on with what i was saying. my tactics, tweddle, have been crowned with
success--the famous venus is now safe in my hands! what do you say to
that?"

"say? why, what clever gentlemen you detective officers are, to be
sure!" cried leander.

"well, to be candid, there's not many in the department that would have
managed the job as neatly; but, then, it was a case i'd gone into, and
thoroughly got up."

"that i'm sure you must have done, sir," agreed leander. "how ever did
you come on it?" he felt a kind of curiosity to hear the answer.

"tweddle," was the solemn reply, "that is a thing you must be content to
leave in its native mystery" (which leander undoubtedly was). "we in the
criminal investigation department have our secret channels and our
underground sources for obtaining information, but to lay those channels
and sources bare to the public would serve no useful end, nor would it
be an expedient act on my part. all you have any claim to be told is,
that, however costly and complicated, however dangerous even, the means
employed may have been (that i say nothing about), the ultimate end has
been obtained. the venus, sir, will be restored to her place in the
gallery at wricklesmarsh court, without a scratch on her!"

"you don't say so! lor!" cried leander, hoping that his countenance
would keep his secret, "well, there now! and my ring, sir, if you
remember--isn't _that_ on her?"

"you mustn't expect us to do everything. your ring was, as i had every
reason to expect it would be, missing. but i shall be talking the matter
over with sir peter purbecke, who's just come back to wricklesmarsh from
the continent, and, provided--ahem!--you don't go talking about this
affair, i should feel justified in recommending him to make you some
substantial acknowledgment for any--well, little inconvenience you may
have been put to on account of your slight connection with the business,
and the steps i may have thought proper to take in consequence. and,
from all i hear of sir peter, i think he would be inclined to come down
uncommonly handsome."

"well, mr. inspector," said leander, "all i can say is this: if sir
peter was to know the life his statue has led me for the past few days,
i think he'd say i deserved it--i do, indeed!"

*       *       *       *       *

conclusion.

the narrow passage off southampton row is at present without a
hairdresser's establishment, leander having resigned his shop, long
since, in favour of either a fruiterer or a stationer.

but, in one of the leading west end thoroughfares there is a large and
prosperous hair-cutting saloon, over which the name of "tweddle"
glitters resplendent, and the books of which would prove too much for
matilda, even if more domestic duties had not begun to claim her
attention.

leander's troubles are at end. thanks to sir peter purbecke's
munificence, he has made a fresh start; and, so far, fortune has
prospered him. the devices he has invented for correcting nature's more
palpable errors in taste are becoming widely known, while he is famous,
too, as the gifted author of a series of brilliant and popular
hairwashes. he is accustoming his clients to address him as
"professor"--a title which he has actually had conferred upon him from a
quarter in which he is, perhaps, the most highly appreciated--for
prosperity has not exactly lessened his self-esteem.

mr. jauncy, too, is a married man, although he does not respond so
heartily to congratulations. there is no intimacy between the two
households, the heads of which recognise that, as leander puts it,
"their wives harmonise better apart."

to the new collection of casts from the antique, at south kensington,
there has been recently added one which appears in the official
catalogue under the following description:--

"_the cytherean venus._--marble statue. found in a grotto in the island
of cerigo. now in the collection of sir peter purbecke, at wricklesmarsh
court, black-heath.

"this noble work has been indifferently assigned to various periods; the
most general opinion, however, pronounces it to be a copy of an earlier
work of alkamenes, or possibly kephisodotos.

"the unusual smallness of the extremities seems to betray the hand of a
restorer, and there are traces of colour in the original marble, which
are supposed to have been added at a somewhat later period."

should professor tweddle ever find himself in the museum on a bank
holiday, and enter the new gallery, he could hardly avoid seeing the
magnificent cast numbered 333 in the catalogue, and reviving thereby
recollections he has almost succeeded in suppressing.

but this is an experience he will probably spare himself; for he is
known to entertain, on principle, very strong prejudices against
sculpture, and more particularly the antique.

the end.

the wonderful adventures
of
phra the phoenician

retold by
edwin lester arnold

with an introduction by
sir edwin arnold, k. c. i. e.

_with fifteen illustrations by
h. m. paget_

g. p. putnam's sons
new york and london
the knickerbocker press
1917

publisher's note.

this is a new edition of an extraordinary and original book, first
published many years ago.

the knickerbocker press, new york

illustrations

page

i unsheathed my saxon sword _frontispiece_

slipped a length of twisted cloth over his wicked neck and
tightened it with a jerk                                           12

i gave him the spear as he lowered his head                          62

"die, then!" she yelled; "and may a thousand curses weigh down
your souls!"                                                         84

the princes stood hesitating as i towered before them               110

stern, inflexible, i frowned upon them                              154

"by abraham! noble sir, those greaves become your legs!"            182

"i will not trust you!" she screamed                                234

five hundred of us charged boldly ten thousand frenchmen!           270

flamaucœur had taken it full in his side                            276

looking gently in the dead girl's face, was blodwen--blodwen--my
thousand-years-dead wife                                            288

she proffered it to me                                              318

he kept those yellow orbs turned upon the garden                    364

the great bird was dropping his ivory beak into the sweet chalice   372

then came the scoundrel spaniard, his lean, hungry face all drawn
and puckered with his wicked passions                               446

the wonderful adventures
of
phra the phoenician

introduction

by sir edwin arnold, k.c.i.e.

in the garden of my japanese home in tokyo i have just perused the last
sheets of my son's philosophical and historical romance, "phra the
phœnician."

amid other scenes i might be led to analyze, to criticize, perhaps a
little to argue about the singular hypothesis upon which he builds
his story. here, with a buddhist temple at my gate, and with japanese
buddhists around me, nothing seems more natural than that an author,
sufficiently gifted with imagination and study, should follow his hero
beyond the narrow limits of one little existence, down the chain of
many lives, taken up link by link, after each long interval of rest and
reward in the paradise of jô-dô. i have read several chapters to my
asiatic friends, and they say, "oh, yes! it is _ingwa_! it is _karma_!
that is all quite true. we, also, have lived many times, and shall live
many times more on this earth." one of them opens the _shoji_ to let a
purple and silver butterfly escape into the sunshine. she thinks some
day it will thank her--perhaps a million years hence.

moreover, here is a passage which i lately noted, suggestive enough
to serve as preface, even by itself, to the present book. commenting
on a line in my "song celestial," the writer thus remarks: "the human
soul should, therefore, be regarded as already in the present life
connected at the same time with two worlds, of which, so far as it is
confined to personal unity to a body, the material only is clearly
felt. it is, therefore, as good as proved, or, to be diffuse, it could
easily be proved, or, better still, it will hereafter be proved (i know
not where or when), that the human soul, even in this life, stands in
indissoluble community with all immaterial natures of the spirit-world;
that it mutually acts upon them and receives from them impressions, of
which, however, as man it is unconscious, as long as all goes well. it
is, therefore, truly one and the same subject, which belongs at the
same time to the visible and to the invisible world, but not just the
same person, since the representations of the one world, by reason of
its different quality, are not associated with ideas of the other, and,
therefore, what i think as spirit is not remembered by me as man."

i, myself, have consequently taken the stupendous postulates of phra's
narrative with equanimity, if not acceptance, and derived from it a
pleasure and entertainment too great to express, since the critic, in
this case, is a well-pleased father.

the author of "phra" has claimed for romance the ancient license
accorded to poetry and to painting--

pictoribus atque poetis
quidlibet audendi semper fuit æqua potestas.

he has supposed a young phœnician merchant, full of the love of
adventure, and endowed with a large and observant if very mystic
philosophy--such as would serve for no bad standpoint whence to witness
the rise and fall of religions and peoples. the adventurer sets out for
the "tin islands," or cassiterides, at a date before the roman conquest
of england. he dies and lives anew many times, but preserves his
personal identity under the garb of half a dozen transmigrations. and
yet, while renewing in each existence the characteristic passions and
sentiments which constitute his individuality and preserve the unity of
the narrative, the author seems to me to have adapted him to varying
times and places with a vraisemblance and absence of effort which are
extremely effective.

a briton in british days, the slave-consort of his druid wife, he
passes, by daring but convenient inventiveness, into the person of a
centurion in the household of a noble roman lady who illustrates in her
surroundings the luxurious vices of the latter empire with some relics
still of the older republican virtues. hence he glides again into
oblivion, yet wakes from the mystical slumber in time to take part in
king harold's gallant but fatal stand against the normans.

he enjoys the repose, as a saxon thane, which the policy of the
conqueror granted to the vanquished; but after some startling
adventures in the vast oak woods of the south kingdom is rudely ousted
from his homestead by the "foreigners," and in a neighboring monastery
sinks into secular forgetfulness once more of wife and children, lands
and life.

on the return of consciousness he finds himself enshrined as a saint,
thanks to the strange physical phenomena of his suspended animation,
and learns from the abbot that he has lain there in the odor of
sanctity, according to indisputable church records, during 300 years.

he wanders off again, finding everything new and strange, and becomes
an english knight under king edward iii. he is followed to crecy by a
damsel, who, from act to act of his long life-drama, similarly renews
an existence linked with his own, and who constantly seeks his love.
she wears the armor of a brother knight, and on the field of battle she
sacrifices her life for his.

yet once more, a long spell of sleep, which is not death, brings this
much-wandering phra to the reign of queen elizabeth, and it is there,
after many and strange vicissitudes, he writes his experiences, and the
curtain finally falls over the last passage of this remarkable record.

such, briefly, is the framework of the creation which, while it has
certainly proved to me extremely seductive as a story, is full, i
think, of philosophical suggestiveness. as long as men count mournfully
the years of that human life which m. renan has declared to be so
ridiculously short, so long their fancies will hover about the
possibility of an _elixir vitæ_, of splendidly extended spans like
those ascribed to the old patriarchs, and meditate with fascination
the mystical doctrines of buddhism and the vedantes. in such a spirit
the egyptians wrapped their dead in careful fashion, after filling the
body with preservatives; and if ancient tomes have the "seven sleepers"
of the koran, the danish king who dozes under the castle of elsinore,
and our own undying king arthur, do we not go to see "rip van winkle"
at the play, and is not hibernation one among the problems of modern
science which whispers that we might, if we liked, indefinitely adjourn
the waste of corporeal tissue, and spread our seventy or eighty years
over ever so many centuries?

but to be charming, an author is not obliged to be credible, or
what would become of the "arabian nights," of "gulliver," and of
the best books in the library? personally, i admire and i like
"phra" enormously, and, being asked to pen these few lines by way of
introduction, i counsel everybody to read it, forgetting who it is that
respectfully offers this advice until the end of the book, when i shall
be no longer afraid if they remember.

tokyo, japan: april 14, 1890.

the wonderful adventures of phra the phœnician

prologue

well and truly an inspired mind has written, "one man in his time plays
many parts," but surely no other man ever played so many parts in the
course of a single existence as i have.

my own narrative seems incredible to me, yet i am myself a witness of
its truth. when i say that i have lived in this england more than one
thousand years, and have seen her bud from the callowest barbarity to
the height of a prosperity and honor with which the world is full, i
shall at once be branded as a liar. let it pass! the accusation is
familiar to my ears. i tired of resenting it before your fathers'
fathers were born, and the scorn of your offended sense of veracity is
less to me than the lisping of a child.

i was, in the very distance of the beginning, a citizen of that
ancient city whose dominion once stretched from the blue waters of the
ægean round to and beyond the broad stream of the nile herself. your
antiquities were then my household gods, your myths were my beliefs;
those facts and fancies on the very fringe of records about which you
marvel were the commonplace things of my commencement. yes! and those
dusty relics of humanity that you take with unholy zeal from the
silent chambers of sarcophagi and pyramids were my boon companions,
the jolly revelers i knew long ago--the good fellows who drank and
sang with me through warm, long-forgotten nights--they were the great
princes to whom i bent an always duteous knee, and the fair damsels who
tripped our sunny streets when sidon existed, and tyre was not a matter
of speculation, or laughed at their own dainty reflections, in the
golden leisure of that forgotten age, where the black-legged ibis stood
sentinel among the blue lotus-flowers of the temple ponds.

since then, what have i not done! i have traveled to the corners of
the world, and forgotten my own land in the love of another. i have
sat here in britain at the tables of roman centurions, and the last
of her saxon kings died in my arms. i have sworn hatred of foreign
tyrants in the wassail bowls of serfs, and bestrode norman chargers in
tiltyards and battlefields. the kingdoms of the misty western islands
which it was my wonderful fortune to see submerged by alternate tides
of conquest, i have seen emerge triumphant, with all their conquerors
welded into one. i have seen more battles than i can easily recall, and
war in every shape; i have enjoyed all sorts of peace, from the rudest
to the most cultivated.

i have lived, in fact, more than one thousand years in this seagirt
island of yours; and so strange and grim and varied have been my
experiences that i am tempted to set them down with a melancholy faith
in my own uniqueness. though it is more than probable few will believe
me, yet for this i care nothing, nor do i especially seek your approval
of my labors. i, who have tasted a thousand pleasures, and am hoary
with disappointments, can afford to hold your censure as lightly as i
should your commendation.

here, then, are my adventures, and this is how they commenced.

chapter i

regarding the exact particulars of my earliest wanderings i do confess
i am somewhat uncertain. this may tempt you to reply that one whose
memory is so far-reaching and capacious as mine will presently prove
might well have stored up everything that befell him from his very
beginning. all i can say is, things are as i set them down; and those
facts which you cannot believe you must continue to doubt. the first
thirty years of my life, it will be guessed in extenuation, were full
of the frailties and shortcomings of an ordinary mortal; while those
years which followed have impressed themselves indelibly upon my mind
by right of being curious past experience and credibility.

looking back, then, into the very remote past is like looking upon a
country which a low sun at once illuminates and blurs. i dimly perceive
in the golden haze of the ancient time a fair city rising, tier upon
tier, out of the blue waters of the midland sea. a splendid harbor
frames itself out of the mellow uncertainty--a harbor whereof the long
white arms are stretched out to welcome the commerce of all the known
world; and under the white fronts, and at the temple steps of that
ancient city, commerce poured into the lap of luxury every commodity
that could gratify cupidity or minister to human pleasure.

i was young then, no doubt, nor need i say a fool; and very likely the
sight of a thousand strange sails at my father's door excited my daily
wonder, while the avarice which recognizes no good fortune in a present
having was excited by the silks and gems, the rich stuffs and the gums,
the quaint curiosities of human ingenuity and the frolic things of
nature, which were piled up there. more than all, my imagination must
have been fired by the sea captains' tales of wonder or romance, and,
be the cause what it may, i made up my mind to adventure like them, and
carried out my wilful fancy.

it is a fitting preface to all i have learned since that my first
real remembrance should be one of vanity. yet so it was. more than a
thousand years ago--i will not lower my record by a single luster to
propitiate your utmost unbelief--i set out on a first voyage. it might
be yesterday, so well it comes before me--with my youthful pride as
the spirit of a man was born within, and i felt the strong beat of the
fresh salt waves of the open sea upon my trading vessel's prow, and
knew, as i stood there by her steering-oar, that she was stuffed with
a hundred bales of purple cloth from my father's vats along the shore,
and bound whither i listed. who could have been prouder than i?--who
could have heard finer songs of freedom in the merry hum of the warm
southern air in the brown cordage overhead, or the frothy prattle of
the busy water alongside, as we danced that day out of the white arms
of tyre, the queenly city of the ancient seas, and saw the young world
unfurl before us, full of magnificent possibilities?

it is not my wish or intention to write of my early travels, were it
possible. on this voyage (or it may be on some others that followed,
now merged into the associations of the first) we traded east and west,
with adventure and success. the adventure was sure enough, for the
great midland sea was then the center of the world, and what between
white-winged argosies of commerce, the freebooters of a dozen nations
who patroled its bays and corners, and rows of royal galleys sailing to
the conquest of empires, it was a lively and perilous place enough. as
for the profit, it came quickly to those who opened a hundred virgin
markets in the olden days.

we sailed into the great egyptian river up to heliopolis, bartering
stuffs for gold-dust and ivory; at another time we took trinacrian
wine and oranges into ostia--a truly magnificent port, with incredible
capacities for all the fair and pleasant things of life. then we sailed
among the beautiful achaian islands with corn and olives; and so,
profiting everywhere, we lived, for long, a jolly, uncertain life, full
of hardship and pleasure.

for the most part, we hugged the coasts and avoided the open sea.
it was from the little bays, whose mouths we thus crossed, that
the pirates we greatly dreaded dropped down upon merchantmen, like
falcons from their perches. when they took a vessel that resisted,
the crew, at those rough hands, got scant mercy. i have come across a
galley drifting idly before the wind, with all her crew, a grim row
of skeletons, hanging in a row along her yard, and swinging this way
and that, and rattling drearily against the sail and each other in
melancholy unison with the listless wallow of their vessel. at another
time, a roman trireme fell upon a big pirate of melita and stormed and
captured her. the three hundred men on board were too ugly and wicked
to sell, so the romans drove them overboard like sheep, and burned the
boat. when we sailed over the spot at sundown the next day she was
still spluttering and hissing, with the water lapping over the edge of
her charred side, and round among the curls of yellow smoke overhead a
thousand gulls were screeching, while a thousand more sat, gorged and
stupid, upon the dead pirates. not for many nights did we forget the
evil picture of retribution, and how the setting sun flooded the sea
with blood, and how the dead villains, in all their horror, swirled
about in twos and threes in that crimson light, and fell into our wake,
drawn by the current, and came jostling and grinning, and nodding after
us, though we made all sail to outpace them, in a gloomy procession
for a mile or so.

it often seemed to me in those days there were more freebooters afloat
than honest men. at times we ran from these, at times we fought them,
and again we would give a big marauder a share of cargo to save the
ship from his kindred who threatened us. it was a dangerous game, and
one never knew, on rising, where his couch would be at night, nor
whether the prosperous merchant of the morning might not be the naked
slave of the evening, storing his own wealth in a robber cave under the
lash of some savage sea tyrant.

yet even these cruel rovers did me a good turn. we were short of water,
and had run down along a lonely coast to a green spring we knew of to
fill water-butts and skins. when we let go in the little inlet where
the well was to be found, another vessel, and, moreover, a pirate, lay
anchored before us. however, we were consciously virtuous, and, what
was of more consideration, a larger vessel and crew than the other,
so we went ashore and made acquaintance round the fresh water with as
villainous a gang of sea-robbers as ever caused the blood of an honest
trader to run cold in his veins. the very air of their neighborhood
smelled so of treachery and cruelty we soon had but one thought--to
load up and be gone.

but this was a somewhat longer process than we wished, as our friends
had baled the little spring dry, and we had to wait its refilling.
while we did so, i strolled over to a group of miserable slaves turned
out for an airing, and cowering on the black and shadeless rocks. there
were in that abject group captives from every country that fared upon
those seas, and some others besides. the dusky peasant of bœotia, that
fronts the narrow straits, wrung her hands by the fair-cheeked girl
snapped up from the wide gulf of narbo; the dark numidian pearl-fisher
cursed his patron god; and the tall achaian from the many islands of
peloponnesian waters gritted his teeth as he cowered beneath his rags
and bemoaned the fate that threw him into the talons of the sea-hawks.

i looked upon them with small interest, for new-taken slaves were no
great sight to me, until i chanced, a little way from the others, upon
such a captive as i had rarely or never seen. she struck me at once as
being the fiercest and most beautiful creature that mortal eyes had
ever lit upon. never was umbrian or iberian girl like that; never was
cyprian aphrodite served by a maid so pink and white. her hair was
fiery red gold, gleaming in the sunshine like the locks of the young
goddess medusa. her face was of ruddy ivory, and her native comeliness
gleamed through the unwashed dust and tears of many long days and
nights. her eyes were as blue under her shaggy wild hair as the sky
overhead, and her body--grimy under its sorrow-stains--was still as
fair as that of some dainty princess.

knowing the pirate captain would seek a long price for his property, i
determined to use a little persuasion with him. i went back to my men,
and sent one of them, proficient in the art of the bowstring, to look
at the slaves. then i drew the unsuspecting scoundrel up there for a
bargain, and, well out of sight of his gang, we faced the red-haired
girl and discussed her price. the rascal's first figure was three
hundred of your modern pounds, a sum which would then have fetched the
younger daughter of a sultan, full of virtue and accomplishments. as
this girl very likely had neither one nor the other, i did not see why
it was necessary to pay so much, and, stroking my beard, in an agreed
signal, with my hand, as my man was passing behind the old pirate, he
slipped a length of twisted cloth over his wicked neck and tightened it
with a jerk that nearly started the eyes from his head, and brought
him quickly to his knees.

"now, delicately-minded one," i said, "i don't want to fight you and
your crew for this maid here, on whom i have set my heart, but you know
we are numerous and well armed, so let us have a peaceful and honest
bargain. give me a fairer price," and, obedient to my signal, the band
was loosened.

"not a sesterce will i take off," spluttered the wretch, "not a
drachma, not an ounce!"

"come! come! think again," i said, persuasively, "and the cloth shall
help you." thereon, another turn was taken, and my henchman turned his
knuckles into the nape of the swarthy villain's neck until the veins on
his forehead stood out like cordage and the blood ran from his nose and
eyes.

in a minute the rover threw up his hands and signed he had enough, and
when he got his breath we found he had knocked off a hundred pounds.
we gave him the cord again, and brought him down, twist by twist,
to fifty. by this time he was almost at his last gasp, and i was
contented, paying the coins out on a rock and leaving them there, with
the rogue well bound. i was always honest, though, as became the times,
a trifle hard at bargains.

then i cut the red maid loose and took her by the elbow and led her
down to the beach, where we were secretly picked up by my fellows, and
shortly afterward we set sail again for the open main.

thus was acquired the figure-head of my subsequent adventures--the
siren who lured me to that coast where i have lived a thousand years
and more.

it was the inscrutable will of destiny that those shining coins i
paid down on the bare, hot african rock should cost me all my wealth,
my cash and credit at many ports, and that that fair slave, who i
deemed would serve but to lighten a voyage or two, should mock my
forethought, and lead my fate into the strangest paths that ever were
trodden by mortal foot.

in truth, that sunny virago bewitched me. she combined such ferocity
with her grace, and was so pathetic in her reckless grief at times,
that i, the immovable, was moved, and softened the rigor of her
mischance as time went on so much as might be. at once, on this, like
some caged wild creature, which forgives to one master alone the
sorrows of captivity, she softened to me; and before many days were
over she had bathed, and, discarding her rags for a length or two of
cloth, had tied up her hair with a strand of ribbon she found, and,
looking down at her reflection in a vessel of water (her only mirror,
for we carried women but seldom), she smiled for the first time.

after this, progress was rapid, and, though at first we could only
with difficulty make ourselves understood, yet she soon picked up
something of the southern tongue from me, while i very fairly acquired
the british language of this comely tutoress. of her i learned she was
of that latter country, where her father was a chief; how their coast
village had been surprised by a southern rover's foray; she knew not
how many of the people slain, or made captive, and herself carried
off. afterward she had fallen into the hands of other pirates by an
act of sea barter, and they were taking her to alexandria, hoping, as
i guessed, in that luxurious city to obtain a higher price than in the
ordinary markets of gaul or italy.

what i heard of britain from these warm lips greatly fired my
curiosity, and, after touching at several ports and finding trade but
dull, chance clenched my resolution.

we had sailed northward with a cargo of dates, and on the sixth day
ran in under the high promontory of massilia, which you moderns call
marseilles. here i rid myself of my fruit at a very good profit, and,
after talking to a brother merchant i met by chance upon the quay,
fully determined to load up with oil, wine, stuffs, and such other
things as he recommended, and sail at once for britain.

little did i think how momentous this hasty decision would be! it was
brought about partly as i have explained, and partly by the interest
which just then that country was attracting. all the weapons and
things of britain were then in good demand: no tin and gold, the
smiths roundly swore, were like the british; no furs in winter, the
roman ladies vowed, were so warm as those; while no patrician from
tarentum to the tiber held his house well furnished unless a red-haired
slave-girl or two from that remote place idled, sad and listlessly, in
his painted porticoes.

in these slaves there was a brisk and increasing traffic. i went into
the market that ran just along the inner harbor one day, and saw there
an ample supply of such curious goods suitable for every need.

all down the middle of a wide street rough booths of sailcloth had been
run up, and about and before these crouched slaves of every age and
condition. there were old men and young men--fierce and wild-looking
barbarians, in all truth--some with the raw, red scars on chest and
limbs they had taken a few weeks before in a last stand for liberty,
and some groaning in the sickness that attended the slaver's lash and
their condition.

there were lank-haired girls, submitting with sullen hate to the
appraising fingers of purchasers laughing and chatting in latin or
gaulish, as they dealt with them no more gently than a buyer deals with
sheep when mutton is cheap. mothers again--sick and travel-stained
themselves--were soothing the unkempt little ones who cowered behind
them and shrank from every roman footstep as the quails shrink from
a kestrel's shadow. some of these children were very flowers of
comeliness, though trodden into the mire of misfortune. i bought a
little girl to attend upon her upon my ship, who, though she wore at
the time but one sorry cloth, and was streaked with dirt and dust,
had eyes clear as the southern sky overhead, and hair that glistened
in uncared-for brightness upon her shoulders like a tissue of golden
threads. her mother was loth to part with her, and fought like a tiger
when we separated them. it was only after the dealer's lash had cut a
dozen red furrows into her back, and a bystander had beat her on the
head with the flat of his sword, that she gave in and swooned, and i
led the weeping little one away.

so we loaded up again with easter nothings, such as the barbarians
might be supposed to like, and in a few weeks started once more. we
sailed down the green coast of hispania, through the narrow waters
of herculis fretum, and then, leaving the undulating hills of that
pleasant strait behind, turned northward through the long waves of the
black outer sea.

for many days we rolled up a sullen and dangerous coast, but one
morning our pilot called me from my breakfast of fruit and millet
cakes, and, pointing over the green expanse, told me yonder white surf
on the right was breaking on the steep rocks of armorica, while the
misty british shore lay ahead.

so i called out blodwen the slave, and told her to snuff the wind
and find what it had to say. she knew only too well, and was vastly
delighted, wistfully scanning the long gray horizon ahead, and being
beside herself with eagerness.

we steered westwardly toward the outer islands, called cassiterides,
where most of our people collected and bought their tin, but we were
fated not to reach them. on the morrow so fierce a gale sprang out of
the deep we could by no means stand against it, but turned and fled
through the storm, and over such a terrible expanse of mighty billows
as i never saw the like of.

to my surprise, my girl thought naught of the wind and sea, but came
constantly to the groaning bulwarks, where the angry green water
swirled and gleamed like a caldron, and, holding on by a shroud, looked
with longing but familiar eyes at the rugged shore we were running
down. at one time i saw her smile to recognize, close in shore, and
plunging heavily toward some unknown haven, half a dozen of her own
native fisher-boats. later on, blodwen brightened up even more as the
savage cliffs of the west gave way to rolling downs of grass, and when
these, as we fled with the sea-spume, grew lower, and were here and
there clothed with woods, and little specks among them of cornfields,
she shouted with joy, and, leaping down from the tall prow, where she
had stood, indifferent to the angry thunder of the bursting surges upon
our counter, and the sting and rattle of the white spray that flew up
to the swinging yard every time we dropped into the bosom of the angry
sea, she said exultingly, with her face red and gleaming in a salt wet
glaze, she could guide us to a harbor if we would.

i was by this time a little sick at heart for the safety of all my
precious things in bales and boxes below, and something like the long
invoice of them i knew so well rose in my throat every time we sank
with a horrible sinking into one of those shadowy valleys between the
hissing crests--so i nodded. blodwen at once made the helmsman draw
nearer the coast. by the time we had approached the shore within a
mile or so the white squalls were following each other fast, while
heavy columns of western rain were careering along the green sea in
many tall, spectral forms. but nothing cared that purchase of mine.
she had gone to the tiller, and, like some wild goddess of the foam,
stood there, her long hair flying on the wet sea wind, and her fierce,
bright eyes aglow with pleasure and excitement as she scanned the white
ramparts of the coast down which we were hurtling. she was oblivious
of the swarthy seamen, who eyed her with wonder and awe; oblivious of
the white bed of froth which boiled and flashed all down the rim of our
dipping gunwale; and equally indifferent to the heavy rain that smoked
upon our decks, and made our straining sails as hard and stiff as wood.

just as the great shore began to loom over us, and i sorely doubted
my wisdom in sailing these unknown waters with such a pilot, she gave
a scream of pleasure--an exulting, triumphant note that roused a
sympathetic chorus in the piping wild fowl overhead--and, following the
point of her finger, we saw the solid rampart of cliffs had divided,
and a little estuary was opening before us.

round went our felucca to the imperious gesture of that girl, and,
gripping the throbbing tiller over the hands of the strong steersman,
aglow with excitement, yet noting everything, while the swart brown
sailors shouted at the humming cordage, she took us down through an
angry caldron of sea and over a foaming bar (where i cursed, in my
haste, every ounce i had spent upon her) into the quieter waters
beyond; and when, a few minutes later--reeking with salt spray, but
safe and sound--we slowly rolled in with the making tide to a secure,
landlocked haven, that brave girl left the rudder, and, going forward,
gave one look at the opening valley, which i afterward knew was her
strangely recovered home, and then her fair head fell upon her arms,
and, leaning against the mast, under the tent of her red hair, she
burst into a passionate storm of tears.

she soon recovered, and stealing a glance at me as she wiped her lids
with the back of her hands, to note if i were angry, her feminine
perception found my eyes gave the lie to the frown upon my forehead,
so she put on some extra importance (as though the air of the place
suited her dignity), and resumed command of the ship.

well! there is much to tell, so it must be told briefly. we sailed
into a fair green estuary, with woods on either hand dipping into the
water and nodding their own glistening reflections, until we turned
a bend and came upon a british village down by the edge. there were,
perhaps, two hundred huts scattered round the slope of a grassy mound,
upon top of which was a stockade of logs and mud walls encompassing a
few better-built houses. canoes and bigger boats were drawn up on the
beach, and naked children and dogs were at play along the margin; while
women and some few men were grinding corn and fashioning boat-gear.

as our sails came round the headland, with one single accord the
population took to flight, flung down their meal-bags and tools,
tumbling over each other in their haste, and, yelling and scrambling,
they streamed away to the hill.

this amused blodwen greatly, and she let them run until the fat
old women of the crowd had sorted themselves out into a panting
rear guard halfway up, and the long-legged youngsters were already
scrambling over the barrier; then, with her hand over her mouth, she
exerted her powerful voice in a long, wailing signal cry. the effect
was instantaneous. the crowd stopped, hesitated, and finally came
scrambling down again to the beach; and, after a little parley, being
assured of their good-will, and greatly urged by blodwen, we landed,
and were soon overwhelmed in a throng of wondering, jostling, excited
british.

but it was not me to whom they thronged, but rather her; and such
wonder and surprise, broadening slowly in joy as she, with her nimble
woman's tongue, answered their countless questions, i never witnessed.
at last they set up yelling and shouting, and, seizing her, dragged and
carried her in a tumultuous procession up the zigzag into the fortalice.

blodwen had come home--that was all; and from a slave girl had
blossomed into a princess!

never before was there such a yelling and chattering and blowing of
horns and beating of shields. while messengers rushed off down the
woodland paths to rouse the country, the villagers crowded round me and
my men, and, having by the advice of one of their elders, relinquished
their first intention of cutting all our throats in the excess of their
pleasure, treated us very handsomely, feeding and feasting the crew to
the utmost of their capacity.

i, as you will suppose, was ill at ease for my fair barbarian who had
thus turned the tables upon me, and in whose power it was impossible
not to recognize that we now lay. how would the slave princess treat
her captive master? i was not long in doubt. her messenger presently
touched me on the shoulder as i sat, a little rueful, on a stone apart
from my rollicking men, and led me through that prehistoric village
street up the gentle slope and between the oak-log barrier into the
long, low dwelling that was at once the palace and the citadel of the
place.

entering, i found myself in a very spacious hall, effective in its
gloomy dignity. all round the three straight sides the massive walls
were hidden in drapery of the skins and furs of bear, wolf, and deer,
and over these were hung in rude profusion light round shields embossed
with shining metal knobs, javelins, and boar spears, with a hundred
other implements of war or woodcraft. below them stood along the
walls rough settles, and benches with rougher tables, enough to seat,
perhaps, a hundred men. at the crescent-shaped end of the hall, facing
the entrance door, was a daïs--a raised platform of solid logs closely
placed together and covered with skins--upon which a massive and ample
chair stood, also of oak, and wonderfully fashioned and carved by the
patient labor of many hands.

nigh it were a group of women, and one or two white-robed druids, as
these people call their priests. but chief among them was she who
stepped forth to meet me, clad (for her first idea had been to change
her dress) in fine linen and fair furs--how, i scarcely know, save
that they suited her marvelously. fine chains of hammered gold were
about her neck, a shining gorget belt set with a great boss of native
pearls upon her middle, and her two bare white arms gleamed like ivory
under their load of bracelets of yellow metal and prismatic pearl shell
that clanked harmoniously to her every movement. but the air she put
on along with these fine things was equally becoming, and she took me
by the hand with an affectionate condescension, while, turning to her
people, she briefly harangued them, running glibly over my virtues,
and bestowing praise upon the way in which i had "rescued and restored
her to her kindred," until, so gracefully did she pervert the truth, i
felt a blush of unwonted virtue under my callous skin; and when they
acclaimed me friend and ally, i stood an inch taller among them to find
myself of such unexpected worth--one tall druid alone scowling on me
evilly.

for long that pleasant village by the shallow waters remembered the
coming of blodwen to her own. her kinsmen had all been slain in the
raid of the sea-rovers which brought about her captivity, and thus--the
succession to headship and rule being very strictly observed among the
britons--she was elected, after an absence of six months, to the oak
throne and the headship of the clan with an almost unbroken accord.
but that priest, dhuwallon, her cousin, and next below her in birth,
scowled again to see her seated there, and hated me, i saw, as the
unconscious thwarter of his ambition.

those were fine times, and the princess bought my cargo of wine and
oil and southern things, distributing it to all that came to pay her
homage, so that for days we were drunk and jolly. fires gleamed on
twenty hilltops round about, and the little becks ran red down to the
river with the blood of sheep and bullocks slaughtered in sacrifice;
and the foot-tracks in the woods were stamped into highways; and the
fords ran muddy to the ocean; and the grass was worn away; and birds
and beasts fled to quieter thickets; and fishes swam out to the blue
sea; and everything was eaten up, far and wide; that time my fair slave
girl first put her foot upon the daïs and prayed to the manes of her
ancestors among the oak trees.

chapter ii

nothing whatever have i to say against blodwen, the beautiful british
princess, and many months we spent there happily in her town: and she
bore a son, for whom the black priest, at the accursed inspiration of
his own jealous heart and thwarted hopes, read out an evil destiny, to
her great sorrow.

going down one morning to the shore, somewhat sad and sorry, for the
inevitable time of parting was near, my ship lying ready loaded by the
beach, i rubbed my eyes again and again to see that the felucca had
gone from the little inlet where she had lain so long. nor was comfort
at hand when, rushing to a promontory commanding a better view, to my
horror there shone the golden speck of her sail in the morning sunlight
on the blue rim of the most distant sea.

i have often thought, since, the crafty princess had a hand in this
desertion. she was so ready with her condolence, so persuasive that
i should "bide the winter and leave her in the spring" (the which
was said with her most detaining smile), that i could not think the
catastrophe took my gentle savage much by surprise.

i yielded, and the long black winter was worn through among the
british, until, when the yellow light came back again, i had married
blodwen before all the tribe and was rich by her constant favor, nor,
need it be said, more loth than ever to leave her. in truth, she was
a good princess, but very variable. blodwen the chieftainess urging
her clansmen to a tribal fight, red hot with the strong drink of war,
or reeking with the fumes and cruelty of a bloody sacrifice to baal,
was one thing; and, on the other hand, blodwen tending with the rude
skill of the day her kinsmen's wounds, blodwen the daughter, weeping
gracious, silent tears in the hall of her fathers as the minstrels
chanted their praises, or humming a ditty to the listening, blue-eyed
little one upon her knee--his cheek to hers--was all another sight; and
i loved her better than i have ever loved any of those other women who
have loved me since.

but sterner things were coming my erratic way. the proud roman eagle,
having in these years long tyrannized over fertile gaul, must needs
swoop down on our brothers along that rocky coast of armorica that
faces our white shore, carrying death and destruction among our kinsmen
as the peregrines in the cliffs harry the frightened seamews.

forthwith the narrow waters were black with our hide-sailed boats
rushing to succor. but it was useless. who could stand against the
roman? our men came back presently--few, wounded, and crestfallen,
with long tales of the foeman's deadly might by sea and shore.

then, a little later on, we had to fight for ourselves, through
scantily we had expected it. early one autumn a friendly veneti came
over from gaul and warned the southern princes the stern roman consul
cæsar was collecting boats and men to invade us. at once on this news
were we all torn by diverse counsels and jealousies, and blodwen hung
in my arms for a tearful space, and then sent me eastward with a few
men--all she could spare from watching her own dangerous neighbors--to
oppose the roman landing; while the priest dhuwallon, though exempt by
his order from military service, followed, sullen, behind my warlike
clansmen.

we joined other bodies of british, until by the beginning of the
harvest month we had encamped along the kentish downs in very good
force, though disunited. three days later, at dawn, came in a runner
who said that cæsar was landing to the westward--how i wished that
traitor lie would stick in his false throat and choke him!--and
thither, bitterly against my advice, went nearly all our men.

even now it irks me to tell this story. while the next young morning
was still but a yellow streak upon the sea, our keen watchers saw
sails coming from the pale gaulish coast, and by the time the primrose
portals of the day were fully open, the water was covered with them
from one hand to the other.

in vain our recalling signal-fires smoked. a thousand scythed chariots
and four thousand men were away, and by noon the great consul's
foremost galley took the british ground where the beach shelved up to
the marshy flats, which again rose, through coppices and dingles, to
our camp on the overhanging hills. another and another followed, all
thronged with tawny stalwart men in brass and leather. what could
we do against this mighty fleet that came headlong upon us, rank
behind rank, the white water flashing in tangled ribbons from their
innumerable prows, and the dreaded symbols of roman power gleaming from
every high-built stern?

we rushed down, disorderly, to meet them, the druids urging us on with
song and sacrifice, and waded into the water to our waists, for we
were as courageous as we were undisciplined, and they hesitated for
some seconds to leave their lurching boats. i remember at this moment,
when the fate of a kingdom hung in the balance, down there jumped a
centurion, and waving a golden eagle over his head, drew his short
sword, and calling out that "he at least would do his duty to the
republic," made straight for me.

brave youth! as he rushed impetuous through the water my ready javelin
took him true under the gilded plate that hung upon his chest, and the
next wave rolled in to my feet a lifeless body lapped in a shroud of
crimson foam.

but now the legionaries were springing out far and near, and fighting
hand to hand with the skin-clad british, who gave way before them
slowly and stubbornly. many were they who died, and the floating
corpses jostled and rolled about among us as we plunged and fought and
screamed in the shallow tide, and beat on the swarming, impervious
golden shields of the invaders.

back to the beach they drove us, hand to hand and foot to foot, and
then, with a long shout of triumph that startled the seafowl on the
distant cliffs, they pushed us back over the shingles ever farther from
the sea, that idly sported with our dead--back, in spite of all we
could do, to the marshland.

there they formed, after a breathing space, in the long, stern line
that had overwhelmed a hundred nations, and charged us like a living
rampart of steel. and as the angry waves rush upon the immovable
rocks, so rushed we upon them. for a moment or two the sun shone upon a
wild uproar, the fierce contention of two peoples breast to breast, a
glitter of caps and javelins, splintered spears and riven shields, all
flashing in the wild dust of war that the roman eagle loved so well.
and then the britons parted into a thousand fragments and reeled back,
and were trampled under foot, and broke and fled!

britain was lost!

soon after this all the coppices and pathways were thronged with our
flying footmen. yet dhuwallon and i, being mounted, had lingered behind
the rest, galloping hither and thither over the green levels, trying to
get some few british to stand again; but presently it was time to be
gone. the romans, in full possession of the beach, had found a channel,
and drawn some boats up to the shelving shore. they had dropped the
hinged bulwarks, and, with the help of a plank or two, had already
got out some of their twenty or thirty chargers. on to these half a
dozen eager young patricians had vaulted, and, i and dhuwallon being
conspicuous figures, they came galloping down at us. we, on our lighter
steeds, knowing every path and gully in the marshlands, should have got
away from them like starlings from a prowling sheepdog; but treachery
was in the black heart of that high priest at my elbow, and a ravening
hatred which knew neither time nor circumstance.

it was just at the scraggy foothills, and the shouting centurions were
close behind us; the last of our fighters had dashed into the shelter
ahead, and i was galloping down a grassy hollow, when the coward
shearer of mistletoe came up alongside. i looked not at him, but over
my other shoulder at the red plumes of the pursuers dancing on the
sky-line. all in an instant something sped by me, and, shrieking in
pain, my horse plunged forward, missed his footing, and rolled over
into the long autumn grass, with the scoundrel priest's last javelin
quivering in his throat. i heard that villain laugh as he turned for a
moment to look back, and then he vanished into the screen of leaves.

amazed and dizzy, i staggered to my feet, pushed back the long hair and
the warm running blood from my eyes, and, grasping my sword, waited the
onset of the romans. they rode over me as though i were a shock of ripe
barley in august, and one of them, springing down, put his foot to my
throat and made to kill me.

"no, no, fabrius!" said another centurion from the back of a white
steed. "don't kill him! he will be more useful alive."

"you were always tender-hearted, sempronius faunus," grumbled the first
one, reluctantly taking his heel from me and giving permission to rise
with a kick in the side. "what are you going to do with him? make him
native prefect of these marshes, eh?"

"or, perhaps," put in another gilded youth, whose sword itched to think
it was as yet as innocent of blood as when it came from its tuscany
smithy--"perhaps sempronius is going to have a private procession of
his own when he gets back to the tiber, and wishes early to collect
prisoners for his chariot-tail."

disregarding their banter, the centurion sempronius, who was a comely
young fellow, and seemed just then extremely admirable in person and
principles to me, mounted again, and, pointing with his short sword to
the shore, bid me march, speaking the gallic tongue, and in a manner
there was no gainsaying.

so i was a prisoner to the romans, and they bound me, and left me
lying for ten hours under the side of one of their stranded ships,
down by the melancholy afternoon sea, still playing with its dead
men, and rolling and jostling together in its long green fingers the
raven-haired etrurian and the pale, white-faced celt. then, when it was
evening, they picked me up, and a low plebeian, in leather and brass,
struck me in the face when, husky and spent with fighting, i asked for
a cup of water. they took me away through their camp, and a mile down
the dingles, where the roman legionaries were digging fosses and making
their camp in the ruddy flicker of watch-fires, under the british oaks,
to a rising knoll.

here the main body of the invaders were lying in a great crescent
toward the inland, and crowning the hillock was a scarp, where a rough
pavilion of skins, and sails from the vessels on the beach, had been
erected.

as we approached this all the noise and laughter died out of my guard,
who now moved in perfect silence. a bowshot away we halted, and
presently sempronius was seen backing out of the tent with an air of
the greatest diffidence. seizing me by my manacled arms, he led me to
it. at the very threshold he whispered in my ear:

"briton, if you value that tawny skin of yours i saved this morning,
speak true and straight to him who sits within," and without another
word he thrust me into the rough pavilion. at a little table, dark
with usage, and scarred with campaigning, a man was sitting, an ample
toga partly hiding the close-fitting leather vest he wore beneath it.
his long and nervous fingers were urging over the tablets before him
a stylus with a speed few in those days commanded, while a little
earthenware lamp, with a flickering wick burning in the turned-up
spout, cast a wavering light upon his thin, sharp-cut features--the
imperious mouth that was shut so tight, and the strong lines of his
dark, commanding face.

he went on writing as i entered, without looking up; and my gaze
wandered round the poor walls of his tent, his piled-up arms in one
place, his truckle bed in another, there a heap of choice british
spoil, flags, and symbols, and weapons, and there a foreign case, half
opened, stocked with bags of coins and vellum rolls. all was martial
confusion in the black and yellow light of that strange little chamber,
and as i turned back to him i felt a shock run through me to find the
blackest and most piercing pair of eyes that ever shone from a mortal
head fixed upon my face.

he rose, and, with the lamp in his hand, surveyed me from top to toe.

"of the veneti?" he said, in allusion to my dark un-british hair, and i
answered "no."

"what, then?"

i told him i was a knight just now in the service of the british king.

"how many of your men opposed us to-day?" was the next question.

"a third as many as you brought with you where you were not invited."

"and how many are there in arms behind the downs and in this southern
country?"

"how many pebbles are there on yonder beach? how many ears of corn did
we pull last harvest?" i answered, for i thought i should die in the
morning, and this made me brave and surly.

he frowned very blackly at my defiance, but curbing, i could see, his
wrath, he put the lamp on the table, and, after a minute of communing
with himself, he said, in a voice over which policy threw a thin veil
of amiability:

"perhaps, as a british knight and a good soldier, i have no doubt you
could speak better with your hands untied?"

i thanked him, replying that it was so; and he came up, freeing, with
a beautiful little golden stiletto he wore in his girdle, my wrists.
this kindly, slight act of soldierly trust obliged me to the roman
general, and i answered his quick, incisive questions in the gaulish
tongue as far as honestly might be. he got little about our forces,
finding his prisoner more effusive in this quarter than communicative.
once or twice, when my answers verged on the scornful, i saw the
imperious temper and haughty nature at strife with his will in that
stern, masterful face and those keen black eyes.

but when we spoke of the british people i could satisfy his curious and
many questions about them more frankly. every now and then, as some
answer interested him, he would take a quick glance at me, as though
to read in my face whether it were the truth or not, and, stopping by
his little table, he would jot down a passage on the wax, scan it over,
and inquire of something else. our life and living, wars, religions,
friendships, all seemed interesting to this acute gentleman so plainly
clad, and it was only when we had been an hour together, and after he
had clearly got from me all he wished, that he called the guard and
dismissed me, bidding sempronius, in latin, which the general thought i
knew not, to give me food and drink, but keep me fast for the present.

sempronius showed the utmost deference to the little man in the toga
and leather jerkin, listening with bent head, and backing from his
presence; while i but roughly gave him thanks for my free hands, and
stalked out after my jailer with small ceremony.

once in the starlight, and out of earshot, the centurion said to me,
with a frown:

"briton, i feel somewhat responsible for you, and i beg, the next
time you leave that presence, not to carry your head so high or turn
that wolf-skinned back of yours on him so readily, or i am confident
i shall have orders to teach you manners. did you cast yourself down
when you entered?"

"not i."

"jove! and did not kneel while you spoke to him?"

"not once," i said.

"now, by the sacred flame! do you mean to say you stood the whole time
as i found you, towering in your ragged skins, your bare, braceleted
arms upon your chest, and giving cæsar back stare for stare in his very
tent?"

"who?"

"cæsar himself. why, who else? cæsar, whose word is life and death from
here to the apennines; who is going to lick up this country of yours as
a hungry beggar licks out a porringer. surely you knew that he to whom
you spoke so freely was our master, the great prætor himself!"

here was an oversight. i might have guessed so much; but, full of
other things, i had never supposed the little man was anything but a
roman general sent out to harry and pursue us. strange ideas rose at
once, and while the tyrian in me was awe-struck by the closeness of my
approach to a famous and dreaded person, the briton moaned at a golden
opportunity lost to unravel, by one bold stroke--a stroke of poniard,
of burning brand from the fire, of anything--the net that was closing
over this unfortunate island.

so strong rose these latter regrets at having had cæsar, the unwelcome,
the relentless, within arms' length, and having let him go forth with
his indomitable blood still flowing in his lordly veins, that i stopped
short, clapped my hand upon my swordless scabbard, and made a hasty
stride back to the tent.

at once the ready sempronius was on me like a wild cat, and with two
strong legionaries bore me to the ground and tied me hand and foot.
they carried me down to the camp, and there pitched me under a rock,
to reflect until dawn on the things of a disastrous day.

but by earliest twilight the bird had flown! at midnight, when the
tired soldiers slept, i chafed my hempen bonds against a rugged angle
of earth-embedded stone, and in four hours was free, rising silently
among the snoring warriors and passing into the forest as noiselessly
as one of those weird black shadows that the last flashes of their
expiring camp-fires made at play on the background of the woods.

i stole past their outmost pickets while the first flush of day was in
the east, and, then, in the open, turned me to my own people and ran,
like a hind to her little one, over the dewy grasslands and through
the spangled thickets, scaring the conies at their earliest meal, and
frightening the merles and mavis ere they had done a bar of their matin
songs, throwing myself down in the tents of my kinsmen just as the
round sun shone through the close-packed oak trunks.

but, curse the caitiff fools who welcomed me there! it would have been
far better had i abided cæsar's anger, or trusted to that martial boy,
sempronius faunus!

the british churls, angry and sullen at their defeat of yesterday,
were looking for a victim to bear the burden of their wrongs. now the
priest dhuwallon, who had turned livid with fear and anger when i had
come back unharmed from the hands of the enemy, with a ready wit which
was surely lent him from hell, saw he might propitiate the britons
and gratify his own ends by one more coward trick to be played at my
expense. i do not deny his readiness, or grudge him aught, yet i hate
him, even now, from the bottom of my heart, with all that fierce old
anger which then would have filled me with delight and pride if i
could have had his anointed blood smoking in the runnels of my sword.

well. it was his turn again. he procured false witnesses--not a
difficult thing for a high priest in that discontented camp--and by
midday i was bound once more, and before the priests and chiefs as a
traitor and roman spy.

what good was it for me to stand up and tell the truth to that gloomy
circle while the angry crowd outside hungered for a propitiary
sacrifice? in vain i lied with all the resources i could muster, and in
vain, when this was fruitless, denounced that pale villain, my accuser.
when i came to tell of his treachery in killing my horse the day
before, and leaving me to be slain by the enemy, i saw i was but adding
slander, in the judges' eyes, to my other crimes. when i declared i was
no roman, but a briton--an aged fool, his long, white locks fileted
with oak leaves, rose silently and held a polished brass mirror before
me, and by every deity in the northern skies i must own my black hair
and dusky face were far more roman than native.

so they found me guilty, and sentenced me to be offered up to baal next
morning, before the army, as a detected spy.

when that silvery dawn came it brought no relief or respite, for the
laws of the druids, which enjoined slow and deliberate judgments,
forbade the altering of a sentence once pronounced. it was as fine
a day as could be wished for their infernal ceremonial, with the
mellow autumn mist lying wide and flat along the endless vistas of
oak and hazel that then hid almost all the valleys, and over the mist
the golden rays of the sun spread far and near, kissing with crimson
radiance the green knobs of upland that shone above that pearly ocean,
and shining on the bare summits of the lonely grass hills around us,
and gleaming in rosy brilliancy upon the sea that flashed and sparkled
in gray and gold between the downs to the southward. here in this fairy
realm, while the thickets were still beaded with the million jewels of
the morning, and the earth breathed of repose and peace, they carried
out that detestable orgie of which i was the center.

my memory is a little hazy. perhaps, at the time, i was thinking of
other things--a red-haired girl, for instance, playing with her little
ones outside her porch in a distant glen; my shekels of brass and tin
and silver; my kine, my dogs, and my horses, mayhap; such things will
be--and thus i know little of how it came. but presently i was on the
fatal spot.

a wide circle of green grass, kept short and close, in the heart of a
dense thicket of oak. round this circle a ring of great stone columns,
crowned by mighty slabs of the same kind, and hung, to-day, with all
the skins and robes and weapons of the assembled tribesmen; so that the
mighty enclosure was a rude amphitheater, walled by the wealth of the
spectators, and in the center an oblong rock, some eight feet long,
with a gutter down it for the blood to run into a pit at its feet. this
was the fatal slip from which the druids launched that poor vessel, the
soul, upon the endless ocean of eternity.

all round the great circle, when its presence and significance suddenly
burst upon me, were the british, to the number of many hundreds,
squatting on the ground in the front rows, or standing behind against
the gray pillars, an uncouth ring of motley barbarians, shaggy with
wolf and bear skins, gleaming in brass and golden links that glistened
in the morning light against the naked limbs and shoulders, traced and
pictured in blue woad with a hundred designs of war and woodcraft.

they forced me and two other miserable wretches to the altar, and then,
while our guards stood by us, and the mounted men clustered among the
monoliths behind, a deadly silence fell upon the assembly. it was so
still we could hear the beat of our own hearts, and so intolerable that
one of us three fell forward in a swoon ere it had lasted many minutes.
the din of battle was like the murmur of a pleasant brook before that
expectant hush; and when the white procession of executioners came
chanting up the farther avenue of stones, into the arena, i breathed
again, as though it was a nuptial procession, and they were bringing me
a bride less grim than the golden adze which shone at their head.

they sang round the circle their mystic song, and then halted before
the rude stone altar. mixing up religion and justice, as was their
wont, the chief druid recited the crimes of the two culprits beside me,
with their punishment, and immediately the first one, tightly bound,
was pitched upon the stone altar; and while the druids chanted their
hymns to baal the assembled multitude joined in, and, clanging their
shields in an infernal tumult which effectually drowned his yells for
mercy, the sacred adze fell, and first his head, and then his body,
rolled into the hollow, while twenty little streams of crimson blood
trickled down the sides of the altar stone. the next one was treated in
the same way, and tumbled off into the hollow below, and i was hoisted
up to that reeking slab.

while they arranged me, that black priest stole up and hissed in my
ear: "is it of blodwen you think when you shut your eyes? take this,
then, for your final comfort," he said, with a malicious leer--"i, even
i, the despised and thwarted, will see to blodwen, and answer for her
happiness. ah!--you writhe--i thought that would interest you. let your
last thought, accursed stranger, be i and she: let your last conception
be my near revenge! villain! i spit upon and deride you!" and he was
as good as his word, glowering down upon me, helpless, with insatiate
rage and hatred in his eyes, and then, stepping back, signed to the
executioner.

i heard the wild hymn to their savage gods go ringing up again through
the green leaves of the oaks; i heard the clatter of the weapons upon
the round, brass-bound targets, the voices of the priests, and the cry
of a startled kite circling in the pleasant autumn mist overhead. i saw
the great crescent of the sacred golden adze swing into the sky, and
then, while it was just checking to the fall which should extinguish
me, there came a hush upon the people, followed by a wild shout of fear
and anger, and i turned my head half over as i lay, bound, upon the
stone.

i saw the british multitude seethe in confusion, and then burst and
fly, like the foam strands before the wind, as, out of the green
thickets, at the run, their cold, brave faces all emotionless over
their long brass shields, came rank upon rank of roman legionaries.
i saw sempronius, on his white charger, at their head, glittering
in brass and scarlet, and, finding my tongue in my extremity,
"sempronius!" i yelled, "sempronius to the rescue!" but too late!

with a wavering, aimless fall, the adze descended between my neck and
my shoulder, the black curtain of dissolution fell over the painted
picture of the world, there was a noise of a thousand rivers tumbling
into a bottomless cavern, and i expired.

chapter iii

i do confess i can offer no justification for the continuation of my
story. once so fairly sped as i was on that long-distant day, thus
recalled in such detail as i can remember, the natural and regular
thing would be that there should be an end of me, with, perhaps,
a page or two added by some kindly scribe to recall my too quickly
smothered virtues. nevertheless, i write again, not a whit the worse
for a mischance which would have silenced many a man, and in a mood to
tell you of things wonderful enough to strain the sides of your shallow
modern skepticism, as new wine stretches a goat-skin bottle.

all the period between my death on the druid altar and my reawakening
was a void, whereof i can say but little. the only facts pointing to a
faint clue to the wonderful lapse of life are the brief phenomena of my
reawakening, which came to hand in sequence as they are here set down.

my first consciousness was little better than a realization of the
fact that practically i was extinct. to this pointless knowledge there
came a dawning struggle with the powers of mortality, until very
slowly, inch by inch, the negativeness was driven back, and the spark
of life began to brighten within me. to this moment i cannot say how
long the process took. it may have been days, or weeks, or months, or
ages, as likely as not; but when the vital flame was kindled the life
and self-possession spread more quickly, until at last, with little
fluttering breaths like a new-born baby's, and a tingling trickle of
warm blood down my shrunken veins, in one strange minute, four hundred
years after the close of my last spell of living (as i afterward
learned), i feebly opened my eyes, and recognized with dull contentment
that i was alive again.

but, oh! the sorrows attendant on it! every bone and muscle in me ached
to that awakening, and my very fiber shook to the stress of the making
tide of vitality. you who have lain upon an arm for a sleepy hour or
two, and suffered as a result ingenious torments from the new-moving
blood, think of the like sorrows of four hundred years' stagnation! it
was scarcely to be borne, and yet, like many other things of which
the like might be said, i bore it in bitterness of spirit, until life
had trickled into all the unfamiliar pathways of my clay, and then at
length the pain decreased, and i could think and move.

in that strange and lonely hour of temporal resurrection almost
complete darkness surrounded me, and my mind (with one certain
consciousness that i had been very long where i lay) was a chaos of
speculation and fancy and long-forgotten scenes. but as my faculties
came more completely under control, and my eyes accepted the dim
twilight as sufficient and convenient to them, they made out overhead
a dull, massy roof of rock, rough with the strong masonry of mother
earth, and descending in rugged sides to an uneven floor. in fact,
there could be no doubt i was underground, but how far down, and where,
and why, could not be said. all around me were cavernous hollows and
midnight shadows, round which the weird gleam of rude pillars and
irregular walls made a heavy, mysterious coast to a black, uncertain
sea. i sat up and rubbed my eyes--and as i did so i felt every rag of
clothing drop in dust and shreds from my person--and peered into the
almost impenetrable gloom. my outstretched hands on one side touched
the rough rocks of what was apparently the arch of a niche in this
chamber of the nether world, and under me they discovered a sandy
shelf, upon which i lay, some eight or ten feet from the ground, as
near as could be judged. not a sound broke the stillness but the gentle
monotony of falling water, whereof one unseen drop, twice a minute,
fell with a faint silver cadence on to the surface of an unknown
pool. i did not fear, i was not frightened, and soon i noticed as a
set-off to the gloom of my sullen surroundings the marvelous purity
of the atmosphere. it was a preservative itself. such an ambient,
limpid element could surely have existed nowhere else. it was soft
as velvet in its absolute stillness, and pure beyond suspicion. it
was like some thin, sunless vintage that had mellowed, endless years,
in the great vat of the earth, and it now ran with the effect of a
delicate tonic through my inert frame. nor was its sister and ally--the
temperature--less conducive to my cure. in that subterranean place
summer and winter were alike unknown. the trivial changes that vex
the cuticle of the world were here reduced to an unalterable average
of gentle warmth that assimilated with the soulless air to my huge
contentment. you cannot wonder, therefore, that i throve apace, and
explored with increasing strength the limits of my strange imprisonment.

all about me was fine, deep dust, and shreds, which even then smelt
in my palm like remnants of fur and skins. at my elbow was a shallow
british eating-dish, with a little dust at the bottom, and by it a
broken earthenware pitcher such as they used for wine. on my other
side, as i felt with inquisitive fingers, lay a handleless sword, one
of my own, i knew, but thin with age, the point all gone, rusty and
useless. by it, again, reposed a small jar, heavy to lift, and rattling
suggestively when shaken. my two fingers, thrust into the neck, told me
it was full of coins, and i could not but feel a flush of gratitude in
that grim place at the abortive kindness which had put food and drink,
weapons and money, by my side, with a sweet ignorance, yet certainty,
of my future awakening.

but now budding curiosity suggested wider search, and, rising with
difficulty, i cautiously dropped from my lofty shelf on to the ground.
then a wish to gain the outer air took possession of me, and, peering
this way and that, a tiny point of light far away on the right
attracted my attention. on approaching, it turned out to be a small
hole in the cave, out of reach overhead; but, feeling about below this
little star of comfort, the walls appeared soft and peaty to the touch,
so at once i was at work digging hard, with a pointed stone; and the
farther i went the more leafy and rough became the material, while hope
sent my heart thumping against my ribs in tune to my labor.

at last, impulsive, after half an hour's work, a fancy seized me that
i could heave a way out with my shoulder. no sooner said than done. i
took ten steps back, and then plunged fiercely in the darkness of the
great cavern into the moldy screen.

how can i describe the result! it gave way, and i shot, in a whirlwind
of dust, into a sparkling, golden world! i rolled over and over down
a spangled firmament, clutching in my bewilderment, my hands full of
blue and yellow gems at every turn, and slipping and plunging, with a
sirocco of color--red, green, sapphire, and gold--flying round before
my bewildered face. i finally came to a stop, and sat up. you will not
wonder that i glared round me, when i say i was seated at the foot of
all the new marvels of a beautiful limestone knoll, clothed from top
to bottom with bluebells and primroses, spangled with the young spring
greenery of hazel and beech overhead, and backed by the cloudless blue
of an april sky!

on top of this fairy mountain, at the roots of the trees that crowned
it, hidden by bracken and undergrowth, was the round hole from which i
had plunged; nor need i tell you how, remembering what had happened in
there, i rubbed my eyes, and laughed, and marveled greatly at the will
of the inscrutable, which had given me so wonderful a rebirth.

to you must be left to fill up the picture of my sensations and slowly
recurring faculties. how i lay and basked in the warmth, and slowly
remembered everything: to me belongs but the strange and simple
narrative.

one of my first active desires was for breakfast--nor, as my previous
meal had been four centuries earlier, will i apologize for this
weakness. but where and how should it be had? this question soon
answered itself. sauntering hither and thither, the low shoulder of the
ridge was presently crossed, and a narrow footway in the woods leading
to some pleasant pastures entered upon. before i had gone far up this
shady track, a pail of milk in her hand, and whistling a ditty to
herself, came tripping toward me as pretty a maid as had ever twisted a
bit of white hawthorn into her amber hair.

i let her approach, and then, stepping out, made the most respectful
salutation within the knowledge of ancient british courtesy. but, alas!
my appearance was against me, and roman fancies had peopled the hills
with jolly satyrs, for one of which, no doubt, the damsel took me. as i
bowed low the dust of centuries cracked all down my back. i was tawny
and grim, and unshaved, and completely naked--though i had forgotten
it--and even my excellent manners could not warrant my disingenuousness
against such a damning appearance. she screamed with fear, and, letting
go her milk-jar, turned and fled, with a nimbleness which would have
left even the hot old wood-god himself far in the rear.

however, the milk remained, and peering into the pitcher, here seemed
the very thing to recuperate me by easy stages. so i retired to a
cozy dell, and, between copious draughts of that fine natural liquor,
overwhelmed with blessings the sleek kine and the comely maid who
milked them. indeed, the stuff ran into my withered processes like a
freshet stream into a long-dry country; it consoled and satisfied me;
and afterward i slept as an infant all that night and far into another
sun.

the next day brought several needs with it. the chief of these were
more food, more clothes, and a profession (since fate seemed determined
to make me take another space of existence upon the world). all three
were satisfied eventually. as for the first two, i was not particular
as to fashion or diet, and easily supplied them. in the course of a
morning stroll a shepherd's hut was discovered, and on approaching it
cautiously the little shed turned out to be empty. however, the owner
had left several sheepskin mantles and rough homespun clothes on pegs
round the walls, and to these i helped myself sufficiently to convert
an unclothed caveman into a passable yeoman. also, i made free with his
store of oat-cakes and coarse cheese, putting all not needed back upon
his shelf.

here i was again, fed and clothed, but what to do next was the
question. to consider the knotty matter, after spending most of the day
in purposeless wandering, i went up to the top of my own hill--the one
that, unknown to every one, had the cavern in it--and there pondered
the subject long. the whole face of the country perplexed me. it was
certainly britain, but britain so amplified and altered as to be hardly
recognizable. wide fields were everywhere, broad roads traversed the
hills and valleys with impartial straightness, the great woodlands of
the earlier times were gone, or much curtailed, while wonderful white
buildings shone here and there among the foliage, and down away in the
west, by a river, the sunbeams glinted on the roofs and temple fronts
of a fine, unknown town. that was the place, it seemed to me at length,
to refit for another voyage on the strange sea of chance; but i was
too experienced in the ways of the world to travel cityward with an
empty wallet. while meditating upon the manner in which this deficiency
might be met, the golden store of coins left in the cave below suddenly
presented themselves. the very thing! and, as heavy purple clouds
were piling up round the presently sinking sun, earth and sky alike
presaging a storm that evening, the cavern would be a convenient place
to sleep in.

finding the entrance with some difficulty, and noticing, but with no
special attention, that it looked a little larger than when last seen,
my first need was fire. this i had to make for myself. in the pouch of
the shepherd's jerkin was a length of rough twine; this would do for
matches, while as a torch a resinous pine branch, bruised and split,
served well enough. fixing one end of the string to a bush, i took a
turn round a dry stick, and then began laboriously rubbing backward and
forward. in half an hour the string fumed pleasantly, and, something
under the hour--one was nothing if not patient in that age--it charred
and burst into flame.

just as the evening set in, and the earth opened its pores to the first
round drops of the warm-smelling rain that pattered on the young forest
leaves, and the thunder began to murmur distantly under the purple
mantle of the coming storm, my torch spluttering and hissing, i entered
the vast gloomy chamber of my sleep, and, not without a sense of awe,
stole up along the walls a hundred yards or more, to my strange couch.

the coins were safe, and shining greenly in their earthen jar; so,
sticking the light into a cleft, i poured them on to the sand, and then
commenced to tuck the stuff away, as fast as might be, into my girdle.
it was strange, wild work, the only company my own contorted shadow on
the distant rocks and such wild forms of cruel british superstition
as my excited imagination called up; the only sound the rumble of the
storm, now overhead, and the hissing drip of the red resin gleaming on
the wealth, all stamped with images of long-dead kings and consuls,
that i was cramming into my pouch!

by the time the task was nearly finished, i was in a state of nerves
equal to seeing or hearing anything--no doubt long fasting had shaken a
mind usually calm and callous enough--and therefore you will understand
how the blood fled from my limbs and the cold perspiration burst out
upon my forehead, when, having scarified myself with traditions of
ghouls and cave devils, i turned to listen for a moment to the dull
rumble of the thunder and the melancholy wave-like sough of the wind in
the trees, even here audible, and beheld, twenty paces from me, in the
shadows, a vast, shaggy black form, grim and broad as no mortal ever
was, and red and wavering in the uncertain light, seven feet high, and
possessed of two fiery, gleaming eyes that were bent upon my own with a
horrible fixity!

i and that monstrous shadow glared at each other until my breath came
back, when, leaning a moment more against the side of the cavern, i
suddenly snatched the torch from its cleft with a yell of consternation
that was multiplied a thousand times by the echoes until it was like
the battle-cry of a legion of bad spirits, and started off in the
supposed direction of the entrance. but before ten yards had been
covered in that headlong rush, i tripped over a loose stone, and in
another moment had fallen prone, plunging thereby the spluttering torch
into one of the many little pools of water with which the floor was
pitted. with a hiss and a splutter the light went out, and absolute
darkness enveloped everything!

just where i had fallen stood a round boulder, a couple of yards broad,
it had seemed, and some five feet high. i sprang to this, instinctively
clutching it with my hands, just as those abominable green eyes,
brighter than ever in the vortex, got to the other side, and hesitated
there in doubt. then began the most dreadful game i ever played, with a
forfeit attaching to it not to be thought of. you will understand the
cave was absolute sterile blackness to me, a dim world in which the
only animated points were the twin green stars of the cruel ghoul, my
unknown enemy. as those glided round to one side of the little rock, i
as cautiously edged off to the other. then back they would come, and
back i went, now this way and now that--sometimes only an inch or two,
and sometimes making a complete circle--with every nerve at fullest
stretch, and every sense on tiptoe.

why, all this time, it may be asked, did i not run for the entrance?
but, in reply, the first frightened turn or two round the boulder had
made chaos of my geography, and a start in any direction then might
have dashed me into the side of the cave prone, at the mercy of the
horrible thing whose hot, coarse breath fanned me quicker and quicker,
as the game grew warm and more exciting. so near was it that i could
have stretched out my hands, if i had dared, and touched the monstrous
being that i knew stood under those baleful planets that glistened in
the black firmament, now here and now there.

how long, exactly, we dodged and shuffled and panted round that stone
in the darkness cannot be said--it was certainly an hour or more;
but it went on so long that even in my panting stress and excitement
it grew dull after a time, so monotonous was it, and i found myself
speculating on the weather while i danced _vis-à-vis_ to my grim
partner in that frightful pastime.

"yes," i said, "a very bad storm indeed [once to the left], and nearly
overhead now [right]. it is a good thing [twice round and back again]
to be so [a sharp spin round and round--he nearly had me] conveniently
under cover [twice to the left and then back by the opposite side]!"

well, it could not have lasted forever, and i was nearly spent. the
boulder seemed hot and throbbing to my touch, and the floor was
undulating gently, as it does when you land from a voyage; already
fifty or sixty green eyes seemed circling in fiery orbits before me,
when an extraordinary thing befell.

the thunder and lightning had been playing wildly overhead for some
minutes, and the rain was coming down in torrents (even the noise
of rushing hill streams being quite audible in that clear, resonant
space), when, all of a sudden, there came a pause, and then the fall of
a titanian hammer on the dome of the hill, a rending, resounding crash
that shook mother earth right down to her innermost ribs.

at the same instant, before we could catch our breath, the whole
side of the cave opposite to us, some hundred paces of rugged wall,
was deluged with a living, oscillating drapery of blue flame! that
magnificent refulgence came down from above, a glowing cascade of
light. it overran the rocks like a beautiful gauze, clinging lovingly
to their sinuousness, and wrapping their roughness in a tender,
palpitating mantle of its own winsome brightness. it ran its nimble,
fiery tendrils down the veins and crevices, and leaped in fierce
playfulness from point to point, spinning its electric gossamers in
that vacuum air like some enchanted tissue spread between the crags; it
ran to the ledges and trickled off in ambient, sparkling cascades, it
overflowed the sandy bottom in tender sheets of blue and mauve, feeling
here and there with a million fingers for the way it sought, and then
it found it, and sank, as silent, as ghostly, as wonderful as it had
come!

all this was but the work of an instant, but an instant of such
concentrated brightness that i saw every detail, as i have told you,
of that beautiful thing. more; in that second of glowing visibility,
while the blue torch of the storm still shone in the chamber of the
underground, i saw the stone by me, and beyond it, towering amazed and
stupid, with his bulky strength outlined against the light, a great
cave bear in all his native ruggedness! better still, a bowshot on my
right was the narrow approach of the entrance--and as the gleam sank
into the nether world, almost as quick as that gleam itself, with
a heart of wonder and fear, and a foot like the foot of the night
wind overhead, i was gone, and down the sandy floor, and through the
gap, and into the outer world and midnight rain i plunged once more,
grateful and glad!

*       *       *       *       *

after such hairbreadth escapes there was little need to bemoan a wet
coat and an evening under the lee of a heathery scar.

when the morning arrived, clear and bright, as it often does after a
storm, i felt in no mood to hang about the locality, but shook the rain
from my fleece, and breakfasting on a little water from the brook, a
staff in my hand, and my dear-bought wealth in my belt, set out for the
unknown town, whose wet roofs shone like molten silver over the dark
and dewy oak woods.

five hours' tramping brought me there; and truly the city astonished
me greatly. could this, indeed, be britain, was the constant question
on my tongue as i trod fair white streets, with innumerable others
opening down from them on either hand, and noticed the evidence of such
art and luxury as, hitherto, i had dreamed the exclusive prerogative
of the capital of the older empires. here were baths before which the
roman youth dawdled; stately theaters with endless tiers of seats, from
whose rostra degenerate sons of the soil, aping their masters in dress
and speech, recited verse and dialogue trimmed to the latest orator in
fashion by the tiber. mansions and palaces there were, outside which
the sleek steeds of consuls and prætors champed gilded bits while
waiting to carry their owners to gay procession and ceremonial; temples
to apollo, and shrines to venus, dotted the ways, forums, market
places, and the like, in bewildering profusion.

and among all these evidences of the new age thronged a motley mixture
of people. the thoughtful senator, coming from conclave, with his toga
and parchments, elbowed the callow british rustic in the rude raiment
of his fathers. the wild, blue-eyed welsh prince, upon his rough
mountain pony, would scarce give right of way to the bronzed roman
mercenary from the rhine: umbrians and franks, pale-haired germans, and
olive tuscans, laughed and chaffered round the booths and fountains,
while here and there legionaries stood on guard before great houses,
or drank on the tressels of wayside wine-shops. now and again two or
three soldiers came marching down the street with a gang of slaves, or
a shock-headed chieftain from the wild north, fierce and sullen, on his
way to rome; and over all the varied throng the crows and kites circled
in the blue sky, and the little sparrows perched themselves under the
lintel and in the twisted column tops of their mistress's fane.

half the day i stared, and then, having eaten some dry etrurian
grapes--the first for four hundred years--i went to the bath and threw
down a golden coin in the doorkeeper's marble slab.

"why, my son," said that juvenile official of some trivial fifty
summers, "where in the name of mercury did you pick up this antique
thing?" and he handled it curiously. but being in no mind to tell my
tale just then, i put him off lightly, and passed on into the great
bathing place itself. stage by stage, "balneum," "con-camerata,"
"sudatio," "tepidarium," "frigidarium," and all their other chambers, i
went through, until in the last a mighty slave, who had rubbed me with
the strength of hercules himself for half an hour, suddenly stopped,
and, surveying me intently, exclaimed:

"master! i have scrubbed many a strange thing from many a roman body,
but i will swallow all my own towels if i can get this extraordinary
dirt from you," and he pointed to my bare and glowing chest.

there, to my astonishment, revealed for the first time, was a great
serpent-like mark of tattoo and woad circling my body in two wide
zones! what it meant, how it came, was past my comprehension. shrunk
and shriveled as i was with long abstemiousness, it seemed but like
a gigantic smudge meandering down my person--a smudge, however, that
with a little goodly living might stretch out into an elaborate design
of some nature. of course, i knew it was thus the british warriors
were accustomed to adorn themselves, but who had been thus purposely
decorating one that had never knowingly submitted to the operation, and
to what end, was past my guessing.

"never mind, sir, don't despond," said the slave. "we will have another
essay." and hitching me on to the rubbing couch, he knelt upon my
stomach--these bath attendants were no more deferential than they are
now--and exerted his magnificent strength, armed with the stiffest
towel that ever came off a loom, upon me, until i fairly thought that
not only would he have the tattoo off, but also all the skin upon which
it was engrossed. but it was to no purpose. he rose presently and
sulkily declared i had had my money's worth. "the more he rubbed, the
bluer those accursed marks became." this might well be, so i tossed him
an extra coin, and, dressing hastily, covered my uninvited tattoo and
went forth, fully determined to examine and read it--for those things
were nearly always readable--more closely on a better and more private
opportunity.

my next visit was to an etruscan barber, who was shaving all and sundry
under a green-white awning, in a pleasant little piazza. to him i sat,
and while he reaped my antique stubble, with many an exclamation of
surprise and disgust at its toughness, my thoughts wandered away to the
train of remembrances the bath slave's discovery had started. again
i thought of blodwen and my little one; the seaport, with its golden
beaches, and the quiet pools where the trout and salmon of an evening
now and again shattered the crystal mirror of the surface in their
sport as she and i sat upon some grassy bank and talked of village
statecraft, of conquests over petty princelings, of crops and harvests,
of love and war. then, again, i thought of the roman galleys, and
cæsar the penman autocrat; of the british camp, and, lastly, the great
mischance which had, and yet had not, ended me.

"ah, that was a bad slash, indeed, sir, wasn't it?" queried the barber
in my ear. "may i ask in what war you took it?"

this very echo of my fancy came so startlingly true, i sprang to my
feet and glowered upon him.

"o culler of herbs," i said, "o trespasser along the verge of mystery
and medicine"--pointing to the dried things and electuaries with which,
in common then with his kind, his booth was stocked--"where got you the
power of reading minds?"

he shook his head vaguely, as though he did not understand, pointing
to my neck, and replying he knew naught of what my thoughts might have
been, but there, on my shoulder, was obvious evidence of the "slash" he
had alluded to.

i took the steel mirror he offered me, and, sure enough, i saw a
monstrous white seam upon my tawny skin, healed and well, but very
obvious after the bath and shaving.

"why, sir, i have dressed many a wound in my time, but that must have
been about as bad a one as a man could get and live. how did it happen?"

"oh, i forget just now."

"forget! then you must have a marvelously bad memory. why, a thing
like that one might remember for four hundred years!" said the
sagacious little barber, bending his keen eyes on me in a way that
was uncomfortable. in fact, he soon made me so ill at ease, being
very reluctant that my secret should pass into possession of the town
through his garrulous tongue, that i hastily paid him another of those
antique green coins of mine, and passed on again down the great wide
street.

even he who lives two thousand years is still the serf of time,
therefore i cannot describe all the strange things i saw in that
beautiful foreign city set down on the native english land. but
presently i tired, and, having become a roman by exchanging my
sheepskins for a fine scarlet toga, over a military cuirass of
close-fitting steel, inlaid, after the fashion, with turquoise and
gold enamel, sandals upon my feet, and a short sword at my side, i
sought somewhere to sleep. first, i chanced upon a little house set
back from the main thoroughfare, and over the door a withered bush, and
underneath it, on a label, was written thus:

........................................
.                                      .
.       _hic habitat felicitas_        .
.                                      .
........................................

"ah!" i said, as i hammered at the portal with the brass knob of
my weapon, "if, indeed, happiness is landlord here, then phra the
phœnician is the man to be his tenant!" but it would not do. bacchus
was too bibulous in that little abode, and cupid too blind and
indiscriminate. so it was left behind, and presently an open villa was
reached where travelers might rest, and here i took a chamber on one
side of the square marble courtyard, facing on a garden and fountain,
and looking over a fair stretch of country.

no sooner had i eaten, than, very curious to understand the nature of
the bath slave's discoveries upon my skin, i went to the disrobing-room
of the private baths, and, discarding my gorgeous cuirass, and piling
the gilded arms and silken wrappings with which a new-born vanity had
swathed me, in a corner, i stood presently revealed in the common
integument--the one immutable fashion of humanity. but rarely before
had the naked human body presented so much diversity as mine did. i was
mottled and pictured, from my waist upward, in the most bewildering
manner, all in blue and purple tints, just as the slave had said. there
were more pictures on me than there are on an astrologer's celestial
globe; and as i turned hither and thither, before my great burnished
metal mirror, a whole constellation, of dim, uncertain meaning, rose
and set upon my sphere! now this was the more curious, because, as i
have said, i had never in my life submitted me for a moment to the
needle and unguents of those who in british times made a practice of
the art of tattooing. i had seen young warriors under that painful
process, and had stood by as they yelled in pain and reluctant patience
while the most elaborate designs grew up, under the stolid draftsman's
hands, upon their quivering cuticle. but, to blodwen's grief, who would
have had me equal to any of her tribesmen in pattern as in place, i had
ever scorned to be made a mosaic of superstition and flourishes. how,
then, had this mighty maze, this pictorial web of blue myth and marvel,
grown upon me during the night time of my sleep? on studying it closely
it evolved itself into some order, and, though that night i made not
very much of it, yet, as time went on, and my body grew sleek and
fair with good living, the design came up with constantly increasing
vigor. indeed, the narrative i translated from it was so absorbingly
interesting to one in my melancholy circumstances that again and again
i would hurry away to my closet and mirror to see what new detail, what
subtle deduction of stroke or line, had come into view upon the scroll
of the strangest diary that ever was written.

for, indeed, it was blodwen's diary that circled me thus. it began in
the small of my back with the year of my demise upon the druid altar,
and ever as she wrote it she must have rolled, with tender industry,
her journal over and over, and so worked up from my back, in a splendid
widening zone of token and hieroglyphic, for twenty changing seasons,
until my chest was reached, and there the tale ran out in a thin and
tremulous way, which it made my heart ache to understand.

there is no need to describe exactly the mode of deduction, or how
i came to comprehend, without key or help, the sense of the things
before me, but you will understand my wits were sharp in the quest, and
once the main scheme of the idea was understood the rest came easily
enough. the princess, then, had taken a sheaf of corn as her symbol of
the year. there were twenty of them upon me, and i judged their very
varying sizes were intended to indicate good or bad harvest seasons in
the territories of my careful chieftainess. round these central signs
she had grouped such other marks or outlines as served to hint the
changing fortunes of the times. there were heads of oxen by each sheaf,
varying in size according to the conditions of her herds; and fishes,
big or small, to indicate what luck her salmon spearsmen had met with
by the tuneful rapids of that ancient stream i knew so well.

following these early designs was one that interested me greatly.
the gentle chieftainess had, when i left her, expectation of another
member to her tribe of her own providing. i had thought when we
should have beaten the romans to hurry back, and mayhap be in time to
welcome this little one; but you know how i was prevented; and now
here upon my skin, nigh over to my heart, was the sketch and outline
of what seemed a small, new-born maid, all beswaddled in the british
fashion, and very lovingly limned. but what was more curious, was that
its wraps were turned back from its baby shoulder, and there, to my
astonished interpretation, in that silent maternal narrative, was just
the likeness, broad, lasting, indelible, of the frightful scar i wore
myself! long i pondered upon this. had that red-haired slave-princess
by some chance received me back--perhaps at sempronius's compassionate
hands--all hurt as i was, and had that portentous wound set its seal
during anxious vigils upon the unborn babe? i could not guess--i could
but wonder--and, wondering still, pass on to what came next.

here was a graphic picture, no bigger than the palm of my hand, and not
hard to unriddle. an eagle--no doubt the roman one--engaged in fierce
conflict with a beaver--that being blodwen's favorite tribal sign, for
there were many of those animals upon her river. jove! how well 'twas
done! there were the flying feathers, and the fur, and the turmoil and
the litter of the fight, and well i guessed the proud roman bird--that
day he brought my gallant tribe under the yoke--had lost many a
stalwart quill, and damaged many a lordly pinion!

and besides these main records of this fair and careful chancelloress
of her state, there were others that moved me none the less. yes! by
every gloomy spirit that dwelt in the misty shadows of the british
oaks, it gave me a hot flush of gratified revenge to see--there by the
symbol of the first year--a severed, bleeding head, still crowned with
the druid oak.

"oh! oh! dhuwallon, my friend," i laughed, as i guessed the meaning of
that bloody sign, "so they tripped you up at last, my crafty villain.
by all the fiends of your abominable worship, i should like to have
seen the stroke that made that grisly trophy! well, i can guess how it
came about! some slighted tribesman who saw me die peached upon you.
liar and traitor! i can see you stand in that old british hall, strong
in your sanctity and cunning, making your wicked version of the fight
and my undoing, and then, methinks, i see blodwen leap to her feet, red
and fiery with her anger. accursed priest! how you must have sickened
and shrunk from her fierce invective, the headlong damnation of her
bitter accusation, with all the ready evidence with which she supported
it. mayhap your cheeks were as pale that day, good friend, as your
infernal vestments, and first you frowned, and pointed to the signs and
symbols of your office, and pleaded your high appointment before the
assembled people against the answering of the charge. and then, when
that would not do, you whined and cringed, and called her kinswoman.
oh, but i can fancy it, and how my pretty princess--there upon her
father's steps--scorned and cursed you before them all, and how some
ready, faithful hand struck you down, and how they tore your holy linen
from you and dragged you, screaming, to the gateway, and there upon the
threshold log struck your wicked head from your abominable shoulders!
by the sacred mistletoe, i can read my blodwen's noble anger in every
puncture of that revenge-commemorating outline!"

here again, in the years that followed, it pleasured me to see her
little state grow strong and wide. at one time she typified the coming
and destruction of two peak-sailed southern pirates, and then the
building of a new stockade. she also made (perhaps to the worship of my
manes!) a mighty circle. it began with a single upright on my side. the
next year there were two. in the summer that followed she crossed them
by a third great slab, and so on for ten years the tribesmen seemed
to have toiled and labored until they had such a temple of the sun as
must have given my sweet heathen vast pleasure to look upon! she feared
comments and portents much, and punctured me with them most exactly;
she kept her memoranda of corn-pots and stores of hides upon me, like
the clever, frugal mother of her tribe she was; and now and then she
acquired territory, or made new alliances--printing the special tokens
of their heads in a circle with her own, until i was illustrated from
waist to shoulder--a living lexicon of history.

many were the details of that strange blue record i have not mentioned;
many are the strokes and flourishes that still expand and contract to
the pulsations of my mighty life--undeciphered, unintelligible. but i
have said enough to show you how ingenious it was--how sufficient in
its variety, how disappointing in its pointless end. for, indeed, it
stopped suddenly at the twentieth season, and the cause thereof i could
guess only too well!

there, in that roman hotel, i stayed, reflecting. it was in this
rest-house, from the idle gossip of the loungers and chatter of roman
politicians, that i came to comprehend the extent of my sleep in the
cave, and as the truth dawned upon me, with a consciousness of the
infinite vacuity of my world, i went into the garden, and there was
no light in the sunshine, and no color in the flowers, and no music
in the fountain, and i threw my toga over my head and grieved for my
loneliness, with the hum of the crowd outside in my ears, and mourned
my fair princess and all the ancient times so young in memory, yet so
old in fact.

many days i sorrowed purposeless, and then my grief was purged by the
good medicine of hardship and more adventure.

chapter iv

one day i was sitting, in gloomy abstraction, in the sunny garden,
when, looking up suddenly, a little maid stood by, demurely, and
somewhat compassionately, regarding me. grateful then for any sort of
sympathy, i led her to talk, and presently found, as we thawed into
good-fellowship, drawn together by some mutual attraction, that she
was of british birth, and more--from my old village! this was bond
enough in my then state; but think how moved and pleased i was when the
comely little damsel laughingly said, "oh, yes! it is only you roman
lords who come and go more often than these flowers. we british seldom
move; i and my people have lived yonder on the coast for ages!" so i
let my lonely fancy fill in the blanks, and took the little maid for a
kinswoman, and was right glad to know some one in the void world into
which four hundred years' sleep had plunged me.

strange, too, as you will take it, numidea, who, now and then, to my
mind, was so like the ancestress she knew naught of: numidea, the
slave-girl who had stood before me by predestined chance in that hour
of sorrow--it was she who directed my destiny and saved and ruined me
in this chapter, just as her mother had done distant lifetimes before!

between this fair little friend and my inexhaustible wallet i dried
up my grief and turned idle and reckless in that fascinating town of
extravagance and debauchery. it was not a time to boast much of. the
degenerate romans had lost all their valor and most of their skill in
the arts of government. all their hardihood and strength had sunk under
the evil example of the debased capital by the tiber; and, though some
few unpopular ones among them railed against the effeminate luxury of
the times, few heeded, and none were warned. it shamed me to find that
all these latter-day romans thought of was silks and linens, front
seats at the theater, pageantry and spectacles, trinkets and scents.
it roused my disdain to see the senators go by with gilded trains of
servitors and the young centurions swagger down the streets in their
mock armor--their toy, peace-time swords hanging in golden chains from
their tender sides, and the wind warning one of their perfumed presence
even before they came in sight. such were not the men to win an empire,
i thought, or to hold it!

as for the native british, a modicum of them had dropped the sagum for
the toga, and had put on with it all its vices, but few of its virtues.
such a witless, vain, incapable medley of arrogant fools never before
was seen. to their countrymen they represented themselves as possessed
of all the keys of statecraft and government, stirring them up as far
as they durst to discontent and rebellion, while to their masters
they stood acknowledged sycophants and apes of all the meannesses of
a degenerate time. all this was the more the pity, for magnificent
and wide were the evidences of what rome had done for britain during
the long years she had held it. when i slept, it was a chaotic wild,
peopled by brave but scattered tribes; when i awoke, it was a fair,
united realm--a beautiful territory of fertility, rich in corn and
apple-yards, arteried by smooth, white-paved roads, and ruled by half
a dozen wonderful capitals, with countless lesser cities, camps, and
villas, wherein modern luxury, like a rampant, beautiful-flowered
parasite, had overgrown, and choked and killed the sturdy stuff on
which it grew.

well, it is not my province to tell you of these things. the gilded
fops who thronged the city ways, i soon found, were good enough for
drinking bouts and revelry, and, by all olympus! my sleep had made me
thirsty, and my sorrow full of a moroseness which had to be constantly
battened down under the hatches of an artificial pleasure. all the
old, cautious, frugal, merchant spirit had gone, and the roman phra,
in his gold and turquoise cincture, his belt full of his outlandish,
never-failing coins, was soon the talk of the town, the life and soul
of every reckless bout or folly, the terror of all lictors and honest,
benighted citizens.

and, like many another good young man of like inclinations, his exit
was as sudden as his entry! well i remember that day, when my ivory
tablets were crowded with suggestions for new idleness and vanities,
and bore a dozen or two of merry engagements to plays and processions
and carnivals, and all my new-found world looked like a summer sea of
pleasure. under these circumstances, i went to my hoard one evening, as
i had done very often of late, and was somewhat chagrined to discover
only five pieces of money left. however, they were big plump ones,
larger than any i had used before, and, as all those had been good
gold, these still might mean a long spell of frolic for me--when they
were nearly spent it would be time to turn serious.

i at once sat down to rub the general green tint of age from one,
noticing it was more verdant than any of its comrades had been, and
rubbed with increasing consternation and alarm, moment after moment,
until i had reduced it at last to an ancient british copper token, a
base, abominable thing, not good enough to pitch to a starving beggar!

another and another was snatched up and chafed, and, as i toiled on by
my little flickering earthen lamp in my bachelor cell, every one of
those traitor coins in an hour had shed its coating of time and turned
out, under my disgusted fingers, common plebeian metal. there they lay
before me at length, a contemptible five pence, wherewith to carry on a
week's carousing. five pence! why, it was not enough to toss to a noisy
beggar outside the circus--hardly enough for a drink of detestable
british wine, let alone a draught of the good italian vintages that
i had lately come to look upon as my prerogative! horrible! and as i
gazed at them stolidly, that melancholy evening, the airy castle of my
pleasure crumbled from base to battlement.

as the result of long cogitation--knowing the measure of my friends
too well to think of borrowing of them--i finally decided to make a
retreat, and leave my acquaintance my still unblemished reputation in
pawn for the various little items owing by me. taking a look round,
to assure myself every one in the house was asleep, i argued that
to-night, though a pauper, i was still of good account, whereas with
daylight i should be a discredited beggar; so that it was, in fact, a
meritorious action to leave my host an old pair of sandals in lieu of a
month's expenses, and drop through the little window into the garden,
on the way to the open world once more. necessity is ever a sophist.

it is needless to say the gray dawn was not particularly cheerful as
i sprang into the city fosse and struck out for the woods beyond.
the fortune which makes a man one day a gentleman of means and the
next a mendicant is more pleasant to hear of when it has befallen
one's friends than to feel at first hand. it was only the fear of the
detestable city jail, and the abominable provender there, added to the
ridicule of my friends, perhaps, that sent me, scripless, thus afield.
gray as the prospect ahead might be, behind it was black: so i plodded
on, with my spear for a staff and melancholy for a companion.

the leafy shades reached in an hour or so invited rest, and in their
seclusion an idle spell was spent watching, through the green frame
of branches, the fair, careless city below wake to new luxurious
life; watching the blue smoke rise from the temple courtyards, and
the pigeons circling up into the sky, and the glitter of the sun on
the legionaries' arms as they wheeled and formed and re-formed in the
open ground beyond the prefect's house. oh, yes! i knew it all! and
how pleasantly the water spluttered in the marble baths after those
dusty exercises; and how heavy the lightest armor was after such
nights as i and those jolly ones down there were accustomed to spend!
as i, breakfastless, leaned upon the top of my staff, i recalled the
good red wine from my host's coolest cellars, and the hot bread from
slaves' ovens in the street, and how pleasant it was to lie in silk and
sandals, and drink and laugh in the shade, and stare after the comely
british maids, and lay out in those idle sunny hours the fabrics of fun
and mirth.

on again, and by midday a valley opened before me, and at the head, a
mile or so from the river, was a very stately white villa. thither, out
of curiosity, my steps were turned, and i descended upon that lordly
abode by coppices, ferny brakes, and pastures, until one brambly field
alone separated us. an ordinary being, whom the fates had not set
themselves to bandy forever in their immortal hands, would have gone
round this enclosure, and so taken the uneventful pathway, but not so
i; i must needs cross the brambles, and thus bring down fresh ventures
on my head. in the midst of the enclosure was an oak, and under the oak
five or six white cows, with a massive bull of the fierce old british
breed. this animal resented my trespass, and, shaking his head angrily
as i advanced, he came after me at a trot when half way across. now, a
good soldier knows when to run, no less than when to stand, and so my
best foot was put forth in the direction of the house, and i presently
slipped through a hole in the fence directly into the trim gay garden
of the villa itself.

so hasty was my entry that i nearly ran into a stately procession
approaching down one of the well-kept terraces intersecting the
grounds: a seneschal and a butler, a gorgeously arrayed mercenary or
two, men and damsels in waiting, all this lordly array attending a
litter borne by two negro slaves, whereon, with a languidness like that
of convalescence, belied, however, by the bloom of excellent health and
the tokens of robust grace in the every limb, reclined a handsome roman
lady. there was hardly time to take all this in at a glance, when the
gorgeous attendants set up a shout of consternation and alarm, and,
glancing over my shoulder to see the cause, there was that resentful
bull bursting the hedge, a scanty twenty paces away, with vindictive
purpose in his widespread nostrils and angry eyes.

down went the seneschal's staff of office, down went the base
mercenaries' gilded shields; the butler threw the dish of grapes he was
carrying for his lady's refreshment into the bushes; the waiting-maids
dropped their fans, and, shrieking, joined the general rout. worse
than all, those base villains, the littermen, slipped their leather
straps, and in the general panic dropped the litter, and left to her
fate that mistress who, with her sandaled feet wrapped in silks and
spangled linens, struggled in vain to rise. there was no time for fear.
i turned, and as the bull came down upon us two in a snorting avalanche
of white hide and sinew, i gave him the spear, driving it home with all
my strength just in front of the ample shoulder, as he lowered his
head. the strong seven-foot haft of ash, as thick as a man's wrist,
bent between us like a green hazel wand, and then burst into splinters
right up to my grasp. the next moment i was hurled backward, crashing
into the flowers and trim parterres as though it were by the fist of
jove himself i had been struck. hardly touching the ground, i was up
again, my short sword drawn, and ready as ever--though the gay world
swam before me--to kill or to be killed.

it was not necessary. there had been few truer or more forceful spears
than mine in the old times; and there lay the great white monster on
his side in a crimson pool of blood, essaying in vain to lift his head,
and dying in mighty tremors all among the pretty things the servants
had thrown down. the gush of red blood from his chest was wetting even
the silken fringes of the comely dame's skirts and wrappings, while
she, now at last on her feet, frowned down on him, with angry triumph
rather than fear in her countenance.

though there was hardly a change of color on her face or a tremor in
the voice with which she thanked me, yet i somehow felt her ladyship
was in a fine passion behind that disdainful mask. but whether it
were so or not, she was civil enough to me, personally evincing a
condescending interest in a trifling wound that was staining my bare
right arm with crimson, and sending her "good youth" away in a minute
or two to the house to get it bound. as i turned to go, the stately
lady gathered up tunic folds and skirt in her white fist and moved
down upon the group of trembling servants, who were gathering their
wits together slowly under the nervous encouragement of the seneschal.
what she said to them i know not, but if ever the countenances of men
truly reflected their sensations, her brief whispers must have been
exceedingly unpleasant to listen to.

the damsel who bound the scratch upon my shoulder told me something of
this beautiful and wealthy dame. but, in truth, when she called her
lady electra, i needed to hear little more. it was a name that had
circulated freely in the city yonder, and especially when wine was
sparkling best and tongues at lightest! i knew, without asking, the
lady was niece to an emperor, and was reputed as haughty and cruel as
though she had been one of the worst herself; i knew her lawful spouse
was away, like most romans, from his duty just then, and she stood in
his place to tyrannize over the british peasants and sweep the taxes
into his insatiate coffers. i knew, too, why rome was forbidden for a
time to the vivacious lady, as well as some stories, best untold, of
how she enlivened the tedium of her exile in these "savage" places.

in fact, i knew i had fallen into the gilded hold of a magnificent
outlaw, one of the worst productions of a debased and sinking state,
and, being wayward by predestination, i determined to play with the
she-wolf in her own den.

no fancy of mine is so rash but that fate will countersign it. when
electra sent for me presently in the great hall, where the fountains
played into basins of rosy marble, it was to inform me that the
destruction of the bull, and my bearing thereat, had caught her
fancy, and i was to "consider myself for the present in her private
service, and attached to the body-guard." this decision was announced
with an easy imperialness which seemed to ignore all suggestion of
opposition--a suavity such as juno might use in directing the most
timorous of servitors--so, as my wishes ran in unison, i bowed my
thanks, and kissed the fringe of my ladyship's cloak, and thought, as
she lay there before me on her silken couch in the tessellated hall
of her stately home, that i had never before seen so beautiful or
dangerous-looking a creature.

nor had i long to wait for a sight of the vice-prefect's talons. while
she asked me of my history, the which i made up as i told it (and,
having once balked the truth, never afterward told her the real facts),
a messenger came, and, standing at a respectful distance, saluted his
mistress.

"ah!" she said, with a pretty look of interest in her face, and rising
on her elbow, "are they dead?"

"one is, madam," the man responded: "one of your bearers fled, but the
other we secured. we took him into the field and tied him, as your
ladyship directed, to the horns of the strongest white cow. she dragged
him here and there, and gored him for full ten minutes before he
died--and now all that remains of him," with a wave of the hand toward
the vestibule, "most respectfully awaits your ladyship's inspection in
the porch!" and the messenger bowed low.

"it is well. fling the dog into a ditch! and, my friend, let my brave
henchmen know if they do not lay hands on the other villain before
sunset to-morrow, i shall come to them for a substitute."

the successful termination of this episode seemed to relieve my new
mistress.

"ah! my excellent soldier," she said, with a pretty sigh, "you cannot
conceive what a vexation my servants are to me, or how rebellious
and unruly! would there were but a man here, such as yourself, for
instance, to protect and soften a lonely matron's exile."

this was very flattering to my vanity, more especially as it was
accompanied by a gracious look, with more of condescension in it than
i fancied usually fell to the lot of those who met her handsome eyes.
in such circumstances, under a lordly roof, and careless again of
to-morrow, a new spell of experience was commenced in the roman villa,
and i learned much of the ways of corrupt roman government and a
luxurious society there which might amuse you were it not all too long
to set down. for a time, when her ladyship gave, as was her frequent
pleasure, gorgeous dinners, and all the statesmen and soldiers of the
neighboring towns came in to sup with her, i pleaded one thing and
another in excuse for absence from the places where i must have met
many too well known before. but electra, as the time went on, was proud
of her handsome, stalwart centurion, and advanced me quicker than my
modest ambition could demand, clothed me in the gorgeous livery of her
household troops, raised me to the chief command, and finally, one
evening, sat me at her side on her own silken couch, before all the
lords and senators, and, deriding their surprise and covert sarcasm,
proclaimed me first favorite there with royal effrontery.

did i but say electra was proud of her new find? much better had
it been simply so; but she was not accustomed to moderation in
any matters, and perhaps my cold indifference to her overwhelming
attractions, when all else fawned for an indulgent look, excited her
fiery thirst of dominion. be this as it may, no very long time after
my arrival it was palpable her manner was changing; and as the days
went by, and she would have me sit on the tiger-skin at her knee, a
second antony to this british cleopatra, telling wonderful tales of war
and woodcraft, i presently found the unmistakable light of awakening
love shining through her ladyship's half-shut lids. many and many a
time, before and since, has that beacon been lit for me in eyes of
every complexion--it makes me sad to think how well i know that gentle
gleam--but never in all my life did i experience anything like the
concentrated fire that burned silently but more strongly, day by day,
in those black roman eyes.

i would not be warned. more; i took a lawless delight in covertly
piling on material and leading that reckless dame, who had used and
spurned a score of gallant soldiers or great senators, according to her
idle fancy, to pour out her over-ample affection on me, the penniless
adventurer. and, like one who fans a spark among combustible material,
the blaze that resulted was near my undoing.

the more dense i was to her increasing love, the more she suffered.
truly, it was pitiful to see her, who was so little accustomed to know
any other will, thwarted by so fine an agency--to see her imperialness
strain and fret at the silken meshes of love, and fume to have me
know and answer to her meaning, yet fear to tell it, and at times be
timorous to speak, and at others start up, palely wrathful, that she
could not order in this case as elsewhere. indeed, my lady was in a
bad way, and now she would be fierce and sullen, and anon gracious
and melancholy. in the latter mood she said one day, as i sat by her
_bisellium_:

"i am ill and pale, my centurion. i wonder you have not noticed it."

"perhaps, madam," i said, with the distant respect that galled her so,
"perhaps your ladyship's supper last night was over-large and late--and
those lampreys, i warned you against them that third time."

"gross! material!" exclaimed electra, frowning blackly. "guess again--a
finer malady--a subtler pain."

"then, maybe the valley air affects my lady's liver, or rheumatism,
perhaps, exacts a penalty for some twilight rambles."

such banter as this, and more, was all the harder to bear since she
could not revenge it. i was sorry for the tyrantess, for she was
wonderfully attractive thus pensivewise, and wofully in earnest as she
turned away to the painted walls and sighed to herself.

"fie! to be thus withstood by a fameless mercenary. why thus must i,
unaccustomed, sue this one--the least worthy of them all--and lavish
on his dull plebeian ears the sighs that many another would give a
province or two to hear?--i, who have slighted the homage of silk and
scarlet, and imperial purple, even! lucullus was not half so dull--or
palladius, or decius; and that last of many others, my witty publius
torquatus, would have diagnosed my disease and prescribed for it all in
one whisper."

poor lady! it was not within me--though she did not know it--to
hold out for long against the sunshine and storm of her impetuous
nature. neither her abominable cruelties nor her reckless rapacity
could suffice to dim her attractions--many a time since, when that
comely personage has been as clearly wiped from the page of life, as
utterly obliterated from the earth as the very mound of her final
resting-place, have i regretted that she was not born to better days,
and then, perchance, her fine material might have been run into a
nobler mold.

she was jealous, too; and it came about in this way. very soon after i
had taken service with her, whom should i espy, one morning, feeding
the golden pheasants outside the veranda, but my little friend,
numidea. often i had thought of that maid, and determined to discover
that "big house" where she had told me she was bondwoman, and the
"great lady" who sent her tripping long journeys into the town for the
powders and silk stuffs none could better choose. and now here she was
on my path again, a roofmate by strange chance, with her graceful,
tender figure, and her dainty ways, and that chronic friendly smile
upon her mouth that brought such strange fancies to my mind every time
i looked upon it. of course, i befriended the maid as though she were
my own little one, not so many times removed, and equally, of course,
lady electra noticed and misread our friendship. poor numidea! she
had a hard life before i came, and a harder, perhaps, afterward. you
compassionate moderns will wonder when i tell you that numidea has
shown me her white silk shoulders laced with the red scars of old
floggings laid on by electra herself, and the blood-spotted dimples
here and there, where that imperious dame had thrust, for some trivial
offense, a golden bodkin from her hair deep into that innocent flesh.
no one knew better than my noble mistress how to give acute torture to
a slave without depreciating the market price of her property.

but when i became of more weight--when, in brief, my comely tigress
was too fast bound to be dangerous--i spoke up, and electra grew to be
jealous and to hate the small christian slave-girl with all the unruly
strength that marked her other passions.

thus, one day having discovered numidea weeping over a new-made wound,
i sought out the offender, and as she sauntered up and down her
tessellated pavements i shook my fist at her queenship, and said:

"by the bright flame of vesta, lady electra, and by every deity, old
or new, in the endless capacity of the skies, if you get out your
abominable flail for that girl again, or draw but once upon her one of
your accursed bodkins, i will--marry her among the smoking ruins of
this white sty of yours!"

when i spoke to her thus under the lash of my anger, she would
uprise to the topmost reach of her height, and thence, frowning down
upon me, her shapely head tossed back, and her draperies falling
from her crossed arms and ample shoulders to the marble floor, she
would regard me with an imperious start that might have withered an
ordinary mortal. so beautiful and statuesque was her ladyship on these
occasions, towering there in her own white hall like an image of an
offended juno in the first flush of her queenly wrath, that even i
would involuntarily step back a pace. but i did not cower or drop my
eyes, and when we had glowered at each other so for a minute or two
the royal instinct within her was no match for traitor love. slowly
then the woman would come welling into her proud face, and the glow
of anger gave way upon her cheeks; her arms dropped by her sides; she
shrank to mortal proportions, and lastly sank on the ebony and ivory
couch in a wild gust of weeping, wofully asking to know, as i turned
upon my heels, why the slave's trivial scars were more to me than the
mistress's tears.

my vice-prefect was avaricious, too. there was stored in the spacious
hollows below her villa i know not how much bronze and gold squeezed
from those reluctant british hinds whose old-world huts clustered
together in the oak clumps dotting the fertile vales as far as the
eye could see from our roof-ledges on every hand. had all the offices
of the imperial government been kept as she kept her duties of tax
collecting, the great empire would have been further by many a long
year from its ruin. and the closer electra made her accounts, the more
deadly became her exactions, the more angry and rebellious grew the
natives around us.

already they had heard whispers of how hard barbarians were pressing
upon rome, day by day they saw britain depleted of the stalwart
legionaries who had occupied the land four hundred years, and as
phalanx after phalanx went south through gaul to protect the mother
city on the tiber, their demagogues secretly stirred the people up to
ambition and discontent.

nor can it be denied the villains had something to grumble for. society
was dissolute and debased, while the country was full of those who made
the good roman name a byword. the british peasant had to toil and sweat
that a hundred tyrants, the rank production of social decay, might
squander and parade in the luxury and finery his labor purchased.
added to this, the pressing needs of the emperor himself demanded
the services of those who had taken upon themselves for centuries
the protection of the country. as they retired, northern rovers, at
first fitfully, but afterward with increasing rigor, came down upon
the unguarded coasts, and sailing up the estuaries, harried the rich
english vales on either side, and rioted amid the accumulated splendor
and plenty of the luckless land to their heart's content.

saddled thus with the weight of luxurious conquerors who had lost
nearly every art but that of extortion, miserable at home, and
devastated from abroad, who can wonder that the british longed to throw
off the roman yoke and breathe the fresher air of a wholesome life
again? and as the shadow of the imperial wings was withdrawn from them
their hopes ripened; they thought they were strong and ruleworthy.
fatal mistake! i saw it bud, and i saw it bitterly fruitful!

if you turn back the pages of history you will find these hinds did
indeed make a stand for a moment, and when honorius had withdrawn his
last legionaries, and given the islanders their liberty, for a few
brief years there was a shepherd government here--the british ruled
again in britain. then came the next strong tide of northern invasion,
and another conquest.

i well remember how, in the throes of the first great change that
heralded a new era in britain, the herdsmen and serfs were crushed
between waning roman terrors, such as electra wielded, and the growing
horrors of the northmen.

of these latter i saw something. on one occasion when the storm was
brewing, i was away down in the coast provinces hunting wolves,
and thus by chance fell in with a "sea king's" foray and a british
reprisal. on that occasion the spoilers were spoiled, and we taught
the northern ravishers a lesson which, had they been more united so
that such a blow might have been better felt by the whole, would have
damped their ardor for a long time. as it was, to rout and destroy
their scattered parties was but like mopping up the advancing tide of
those salt waves that brought them on us.

those down there by the kentish shore had been unmolested for some
years; they had lived at their leisure, had got their harvests in, had
rebuilt their villages out in the open, and set up forges, and hammered
spearheads and bosses, rings for the women, of silver and brass, and
chains and furniture for their horses, of gold; shearing their flocks,
and living as though such things as norsemen were not--when one day the
infliction came upon them again.

it was a gusty morning in early summer--i remember it well--and most
of the men were from the villages, hunting, when away toward the coast
went up to the brightening sky a thin curl of smoke, followed by
another and another. the sight was understood only too well. line after
line crept up in the silence of the morning over the green tree tops
and against the gray of the sea, while groups of black figures (flying
villagers we knew them to be) went now and then over the sky-line of
the wolds into the security of the valleys to right and left. as the
wail went up from the huts where i rested, a mounted chief, his toes
in the iron rings of his stirrups, and his wolf skins flying from his
bare shoulders, came pounding through the woods with the bad news the
raiders were close behind.

rapid packing was a great feminine accomplishment in those days, and,
while the women swept their children and more portable valuables
into their clothes and disappeared into the forest, we sent the
quickest-footed youths that were with us to call back the hunters, and
made our first stand there round the huts and mounds of the old village
of caen edron.

and we kept its thatch and chattels inviolate, for, by this time, the
countryside was all in arms, and, as the sea was far behind them, the
despoilers but showed themselves on the fringe of the open, exchanged a
javelin or two, and turned.

hot on their track that morning of vengeance we went after them; over
the scrubby open ground and down through the tangles of oak and hazel.
we pressed them back past the charred and smoking remnants of the
villages they had burned, back by the streams that still ran streaky in
quiet places with blood, back down the red path of ruin and savagery
they had trodden, back by the cruel finger-posts of dead women, back
by the halting places of the ravishers--ever drawing new recruits and
courage, till we outnumbered them by six to one--and thus we trampled
that day on the heels of those laden pirates from the valley-head down
to the shore.

it was a time of vengeance, and our women and children crowded, singing
and screaming, after us, to kill and torture the wounded. every now
and then those surly spoilers turned, and we fled before them as the
dogs fly from a big boar who goes to bay; but each time we came on
again, and their standing places by the coverts and under the lichened
rocks were littered with dead, and all bestrewn amid the ferns in the
pink morning light was the glittering spoil they disgorged. truly that
was an hour of victory, and the britons were drunk with success. they
followed like starving wolves after a herd of deer, leaping from rock
to rock, crowding every point of vantage, and running and yelling
through the underwood until surely the northmen must have thought the
place in possession of a legion of devils.

but all this noise was as nothing to the frightful yell of savage
joy which went up from us when we saw the raiders draw together on
the shingle ridge of the beach, and knew instinctively by their pale,
tideward faces and hesitation, that they were trapped--the sea was out,
and their ships were high and dry!

somehow, i scarcely know how it was, when those men turned grimly and
prepared to make their last stand under their ships, a strange silence
fell upon both bands, and for a minute or two the long, wild rank of
our warriors halted at the bottom of the slope, every man silent and
dumb by a strange accord, while opposite, against the sky-line, were
the mighty norsemen, clustered together, and looking down with fierce,
sullen brows, equally silent and expectant, while the sun glinted on
their rustling arms and tall, peaked casques.

we stood thus a minute or two, and i heard the thumpings of my own
heart, like an echo of the low wash of the far-away sea--a plover
piping overhead, and a raven croaking on the distant hills, but
not another sound until--suddenly some british women who had come
red-handed to a mound behind broke out into a wild war song. then
the spell was loosed, and we were again at them, sweeping the sea
kings from the ridge into the tangle of long grass and sand and
stunted bushes that led to the shore, and there, separated, but dying
stubbornly, powerless against our numbers, we pulled them down, and
killed them one by one, lopping their armor from them and stripping
their cloths, till the pleasant lichened valleys of the seashore wood
and the green footways of the moss were stamped full of crimson puddles
and littered with the naked bodies of those tawny giants.

the last man to fall was a chief. twice i had seen him hard pressed,
and had lifted my javelin to slay him, but a touch of silly compunction
had each time held my hand, and now he stood with his back to his
ship, like some fierce, beautiful thing of the sea. his plated brass
and steel cuirass was hacked and dented, his white linen hung in shreds
about him; his arms were bare, and blood ran down them, while his long
fair hair lifted to the salt wind that was coming in freshly with
the tide, and the sun shone on his cold blue eyes, and his polished
harness, and his tall and comely proportions, standing out there
against the dark side of his high-sterned vessel.

but what cared the britons for flaxen locks or the goodliness of a
young thor? he had in his hands a broken spear, his own sword being
snapped in two; and with this weapon he lay about fiercely every now
and then as the men edged in upon him. luckless viking! there is no
retreat or rescue! he was bleeding heavily, and, even as i watched, his
chin sank upon his chest. at once the britons ran in upon him, but the
life flared up again, and the gallant robber crushed in a pair of heads
with his stave and sent the others flying back, still glaring upon
the wide circle of his enemies with death and defiance struggling for
mastery in his eyes in a way wonderful to behold. again and again the
yellow head of the young thor nodded and sank, and again and again he
started up and scowled upon them, as each savage cry of joy, to see him
thus bleeding to death, fell upon his ears. presently he wavered for
a moment and leaned his shoulder against the black side of his ship,
and his lids dropped wearily; at once the britons rushed, and, when i
turned my face there again, they were hacking and stripping the armor
from a mutilated but still quivering corpse!

a few such episodes as this repulse of the northmen, magnified and
circulated with all the lying exaggeration that a coward race ever
wraps about his feats of arms, made the britons bold, and their
boldness brings me to the end of my chapter.

many a pleasant week and month did i live and enjoy all the best
things life has to give: the master of my roman mistress; the foremost
spearman where the boar went to bay among the rocks on the hillside;
the jolliest fellow that was ever invited to a lordly banquet; the
penniless adventurer whose fortune every one envied--and then fate put
me by again, and wiped my tablets clean for another frolic epoch.

it came about this way. the british grew more and more unruly as time
went on, and legion after legion left us. at length, when the last of
the romans were down to the coast, about to embark, electra made up her
mind to go, too--and with all her hoards. but in this latter particular
the new authorities in the neighboring town could not concur, and they
sent two brand-new civilian senators to expostulate and detain her,
the last representative of the old rule. electra had those gentlemen
stripped in the vestibule, and flogged within an ace of their lives,
and then sent them home, bound, in a mean country cart.

all that afternoon we were busy sewing up the gold and bronze in bags,
and by dusk a long train of mules set out for the coast, in charge of a
score of our mercenaries, who, having served a long apprenticeship to
cruelty and extortion, had more to fear from the natives than even we.
nor was it too soon. as the last of the convoy went into the evening
darkness, electra and i ascended the flat, wide roof of her home, and
there we saw, westward, under the stormy red of the setting sun, the
flashing of arms and the dust-wreaths against the glow which hung above
the bands of people moving out and bearing down on us in a mood one
well could guess.

her ladyship, having safely packed, was disdainful and angry. her fine
lips curled as she watched the gray column of citizens swarming out
to the assault; but when her gaze wandered over the fair valleys she
had ruled and bled so long, she was, perhaps, a little regretful and
softened.

"my good and stalwart captain," she said, coming near to me, "yonder
sun, i fear, will never rise again on a roman briton! we must obey the
fates. you know what i would do, had i the power, to yonder scum; but,
since we must desert this house to them (as i see too clearly we must),
how can we best ensure the safety of the treasure?"

we arranged there and then, with small time for parley, that i should
stay with a handful of her mercenaries and make a stand about the
villa, while she, with the last of her servants, should go on and
hurry up by every means in her power the slow caravan of her wealth.
in truth, my mistress was as brave as she was overbearing, and but for
those endless shining bags of gold, i do believe she would have stayed
and fought the place with me.

as it was, she reluctantly consented to the plan, and bid me adieu
(which i returned but coldly), and came back again for another kiss,
and said another good-by, and hung about me, and enjoined caution,
and held my hands, and looked first into my eyes and then back into
the darkness where the laden mules were, as much in love as a rustic
maid, as anxious as a usurer, and torn and distracted between these
contending feelings.

at last she and all the women were gone, whereon with a lighter mind we
set ourselves down to cover their retreat. here must it be confessed
that for myself i was ill at ease; treachery lurked within me. i had
grown somewhat weary of her ladyship, nor had longer a special wish to
be dragged in her golden chains, the restless spirit chance had bred
within moved, and i had determined to see my enamored vice-prefect safe
to her ships, and then--if i could--if i dared--break with her! i well
knew the wild tornado of indignation and love this would call up, and
hence had not confessed my intentions earlier, but had been cold and
distant. the dame, you will see presently, had been sharper in guessing
than i supposed.

we made such preparation as we could, with the small time at our
disposal, barricading the white façade of the villa and closing all
approaches. then we pulled the winter stacks to pieces in the yard,
making two great mounds of fagots in front of the porch, pouring oil
upon each, and stationing a man to fire them, by way of torches, at a
given signal. my hope was that, as the wide roman way ran just below
the villa, the avengers of the ambassadors would not think of passing
on until they had demolished the house and us.

of the loyalty of the few men with me i had little fear. they were
brave and stubborn, all their pay was on electra's mules, and the
british hated them without compunction. there were in our little
company that black evening, seven wild welshmen, under a shaggy-haired,
blue-eyed princeling: gwallon of the bow, he called himself--fifteen
swarthy iberians, all teeth and scimitar--a handful of belgic
mercenaries, with great double-headed axes--but never a roman among
them all in this last stand of roman power in britain!

was i a roman, i wondered, as i stood on the terrace, waiting the onset
of the liberated slaves? what was i? who was i? how came it that he
who was first in repelling the stalwart roman adventurers of endless
years before was the last to lift a sword in their defense? and, more
personally, was this night to be, as it greatly seemed, the last of
all my wild adventures; or had fate infinite others in store for her
bantling?

you will guess how i wondered and speculated as my golden roman armor
clanked to my gloomy stride in electra's empty corridors, and the wet,
fleecy clouds drifted fitfully across the face of a broad, full moon,
and a thousand things of love or sorrow crowded on my busy mind.

we had not long to wait, however. in an hour the mob came scuffling
round the bend, shouting disorderly, with innumerable torches borne
aloft, and they set up a yell when they caught sight of our shining
white walls silently agleam in the moonlight.

there could be no parley with such a leaderless rush, and we attempted
none. without a thought of discipline they stormed the pastures and
swarmed into the garden, a motley, angry crowd, armed with scythes and
hooks and axes, and apparently all the town pressing on behind.

well, we fired our fagots, and they gleamed up fiercely to welcome the
scullion levies to their doom. never did you see such a ruddy, wild
scene--such a motley parody of noble war! the bright flames leaped into
the tranquil sky in volcanoes of spark and hissing tongues, the british
rushed at us between the fires like imps of darkness, and we met them
face to face and slew them like the dogs they were. in a few minutes we
were hemmed in the veranda, under whose columns we had some shelter,
and then my brave welshmen showed me how they could pull their long
bows, which indeed they did in right good earnest, until all the trim
terraces were littered with writhing, howling foemen.

but again they drove us back, this time into the house, and there we
soon had a better light to fight by, for the sparks had caught the
roof, and soon everything far and near was ablaze. every man with
me that night fought like a patrician, and electra's walls, with
their endless painted garlands of oak and myrtle, their cooing doves
and tender cupids, were horribly besmeared and smudged; and her
marble pillars were chipped by flying javelins and gashed by random
axe-strokes.

ten times we hurled ourselves upon the invaders and drove
them staggering backward over the slippery pavements into the
passages--sixteen men had fallen to my own arm alone, and we crammed
their bodies into the doorways for barricade. but it would not do. the
sheer weight of those without made the men within brave against their
will. nothing availed the stinging shafts of my welshmen, the iberian
scimitars played hopelessly (like summer lightning in the glare) upon
a solid wall of humanity, and the german axes could make no pathway
through that impenetrable civilian tangle.

overhead and among us the smoke curled and eddied, and the flames
behind it made it like a hot noonday in our fighting-place. and in the
wreaths of that pungent vapor, circling thick and yellow in the great
open-roofed hall of the noble roman villa, her ladyship's statues of
faun and satyr still fluted and grinned imbecilely as though they liked
the turmoil. niobe wept for new griefs as the marble little ones at her
feet were calcined before her eyes, and the gorgon head wore a hundred
frightful snakes of flame; the pale, proud pallas athene of the greeks
looked disdainfully on the dying barbarians at her feet, and pan,
himself in bronze, leered on us through the reek until his lower limbs
grew white hot--and gave way, and down he came--whereon a mighty briton
heaved him up by his head, and with this hissing, glowing flail carried
destruction and confusion among us.

it was so hot in that flaming marble battle-place that foreigner
and briton broke off fighting now and then to kneel together for a
moment at the red fountain basins where the jets still played (for the
fugitives had forgotten to turn them off), and quenched their thirst
in hurried gasps, ere flying again at each other's throats, and so wild
the confusion and uproar, and so dense the smoke and flame, so red and
slippery were the pavements, and so thick the dead and dying, that
hardly one could tell which were friends and which foes.

for an hour we kept them at bay, and then, when my arms ached with
killing, all of a sudden the face of a man unknown to me, whom i never
had seen before, shone in the gleam at my shoulder.

"phra the phœnician," he said, calling me by an appellation no living
man then knew, "i am bidden to get you hence. come to the inner
doorway--quick!"

i hardly knew what he meant, but there was that about him which i could
not but obey, so i turned and followed his retreating figure.

i ran with him across the courtyard, under the white marble pillars all
aglow, through the silent banquet-hall that had echoed so often to the
haughty laughter of my mistress, and then when we reached the cool,
damp outer air--like a wreath of mist in november, like an eddy among
the dead leaves--my guide vanished and left me!

angry and surprised, but with no time for wonder, i turned back.

even as i did so there was a mighty crack, a groaning of a thousand
timbers, and there before my very face, with a resounding roar,
electra's lordly mansion, and all the wings, and buttresses, and
basements, the rooms, and colonnades, and corridors of that splendid
home of luxury and power, lurched forward, and heaved, and collapsed
in one mighty red ruin that tinctured the sky from east to west, and
buried alike in one vast, glowing hecatomb besiegers and besieged!

*       *       *       *       *

it had fallen, the last stronghold of roman authority, and there was
nothing more to defend! i turned, and took me to the quiet forest
pathways, every nook and bend of which i knew. as i ran, the sweet,
moist air of the evening was like an elixir to my heated frame;
now into the black shadows i plunged, and anon brushing the silver
moonlight dew from bramble and bracken, while a thousand fancies of our
stubborn fight danced around me.

in a little time the road went down to a river that sparkled in flood
under the moonbeams. here the laden mules had crossed into comparative
safety, and now i had to follow them with a single guide-rope to feel
my way alone across the dangerous ford. i struggled through the swollen
stream safely, though it rose high above my waist, and then who should
loom out of the dark on the far side but electra, standing alone and
expectant at the brink.

faithful, stately matron! she was so glad to see me again i was really
sorry i did not love her more. i told her something of the fight, and
she a little of the retreat. some time before the long train of mules
and slaves had gone on up the steep slowing bank, and into the coppice
beyond, and now i and the roman dame lingered a minute or so by the
brink of the turgid stream to see the last flickers of her burning
home. we were on the point of turning; indeed, lady electra seemed
anxious to be gone, when, stepping out of the dark pathway into a
patch of moonlight on the farther shore, a little silver casket in her
duteous hands, and those dainty skirts in which she took so much pride
muddy and soiled, appeared the poor little slave numidea.

she tripped fearfully forth from the shadows and down to the brink,
where the water was swirling against the stones in an ivory and silver
inlay; and when she saw (not perceiving us in the shadow) that all the
people had gone on and she was deserted to the tender mercies of the
foemen behind, she dropped her burden, and threw up her white, clasped
hands in the moonlight, and wailed upon us in a way that made my steel
cuirass too small for my swelling heart.

surely such a pitiful sight ought to have moved any one, yet electra
only cursed those nimble feet under her breath, and from this, though
i may do her heavy injustice, i have since feared she had planned the
desertion and sent the maid back to be killed or taken on some false
errand which for her jealous purpose was too quickly executed.

that noble roman lady pulled me by the hand, and would have had me
leave the girl to her fate, scolding and entreating; and when i angrily
shook myself free, turning her wild, untutored passions into the
channels of love, told me she had guessed my project of leaving her
"for numidea," and clung to me, and endeared me, and promised me "the
tallest porch on palatina" (as i threw off my buckler and broadsword
to be lighter in the stream) and "the whitest arms for welcome there
that ever a roman matron spread" (as i pitched my gilded helmet into
the bushes and strode down to the torrent), if i would but turn my back
once for all upon my little kinswoman.

three times the white arms of that magnificent wanton closed round
me, and three times i wrenched them apart and hurled her back, three
times she came anew to the struggle, squandering her wild, queenly love
upon me, while, under the white light overhead, the tears shone in her
wonderful upturned eyes like very diamonds; three times she invoked
every deity in the hierarchy of the southern skies to witness her
perjured love, and cursed, for my sake, all those absent youths who had
fallen before her. three times she knelt there on the black and white
turf, and wrung her fair hands and shook out her long, thick hair,
and came imploring and begging down to the very lapping of the water.
and there i stood--for i too was a southern, and could be hot and
fierce--and spoke such words as she had never heard before--abused and
scoffed and derided her: laughed at her sorrow and mocked her grief,
and then turned and plunged into the torrent.

the ford was not long: in a minute or two i struggled out on the
farther shore, and numidea, with a cry of pleasure and trustfulness,
came to my dripping arms.

the british, hot on the track, were shouting to one another in the dark
pursuit, so the little maid was picked up securely, and, with her in
my left arm upon my hip, her warm wrists about my neck, and my other
hand on the guide-rope, we went back into the stream again. by the
sacred fane of vesta, it ran stronger than a mill sluice, and tugged
and worried at my limbs like the fingers of a fury! i felt the pebbly
gravel sifting and rolling beneath my feet, and the strong lift of the
water, as it swirled, flying by in the moonlight, hissing and bubbling
at my heaving chest in a way that frightened me--even me. at last, with
every muscle on fire with the strain and turmoil, and my head giddy
with the dancing torrent all about it, i saw the farther bank loom over
us once more, and, heaving a heavy sigh of fatigue, collected myself
for one more crowning effort.

but i had forgotten that royal harpy, my mistress; and, even as i
gathered my last strength in the swirl of the black water below, she
sprang to the verge of the bank overhead, vengeance and hatred flashing
in the eyes that i had left full of gentleness and tears, and gleaming
there in her wrath, her white robes shining in the moonlight against
the ebony setting of the night, and glowered down upon us.

"down with the maid!" she screamed, with all the tyrant in her voice.
"down with her, centurion, or you die together!"

"never! never!" i shouted, for my blood was boiling fiercely, and i
could have laughed at a hundred such as she. but while i shouted my
heart sank, for electra was terrible to behold--an incarnation of
beautiful cruelty, hot, reckless hatred ruling the features that had
never turned upon me before but in sweetness and love. for one minute
the passion gathered head, and then, while i stood in the current
with dread of the coming deed, she snatched my own naked sword from
the ground. "die, then!" she yelled; "and may a thousand curses weigh
down your souls!" as she said it the blade whirled into the moonlight,
descending on the guide-rope just where it ran taut and hard over the
posts, severing it clean to the last strands with one blow of those
effective white arms, and the next minute the hempen cord was torn out
of my grasp, and over and over in a drowning, bewildered cascade of
foam we were swept away down the stream.

it was the wildest swim that ever a mortal took. so fiercely did we
spin and fly that heaven and earth seemed mixed together, and the white
clouds overhead were not whiter than the sheets of foam that ran down
seaward with us. i am a good swimmer, but who could make the bank in
such a caldron of angry waters? and now numidea was on top, and now
i. it went to my heart to hear the poor little christian gasp out on
"good st. christopher!" and to feel the flutter of her breast against
my leather jerkin, and then presently i did not feel it at all. many an
island of wreckage passed us, but none that i could lay hold on, until
presently a mighty log came foaming down upon us, laboring through
that torrent surf like a full-sailed ship. as it passed i threw an arm
over a strong root, and thus, for an hour, behind that black midnight
javelin we flew downward, i knew not whither. then it presently left
the strong stream, and towing me toward a soft alluvial beach, just
as dawn was breaking in the east, deposited me there, and slowly
disappeared again into the void.

this is all i know of roman britain; this is the end of the chapter.

as i reeled ashore with my burden some friendly fisherfolk came
forward to help, but i saw them not. numidea was dead! my poor little
slave-girl--the one speck of virtue in that tyrant world--and i bent
over her, and shut her kindly eyes, and spread on the sand her long wet
braids, and smoothed the modest white gown she was so careful of, with
a heart that was heavier than it ever felt yet in storm or battle!

then all my grief and exertions came upon me in a flood, and the last
thing i remember was stooping down in the morning starlight to kiss the
fair little maid upon that pallid face that looked so wan and strange
amid the wild-spread tangles of her twisted hair.

chapter v

when consciousness came to my eyes again, everything around me was
altered and strange. the very air i drew in with my faint breaths had
a taste of the unknown about it, an impalpable something that was not
before, speaking of change and novelty. as for surroundings, it was
only dimly that any fashioned themselves before those dull and sleepy
eyes of mine that hesitated, as they drowsily turned about, whether to
pronounce this object and that true material substance, or still the
idle fantasy of dreams.

as time went on certainty developed out of doubt, and i found myself
speculating on as strangely furnished a chamber as any one was ever in.
all round the wall hung the implements of many occupations in bunches
and knots. here the rude tools of husbandry were laid aside, the
mattock and the flail; the woodman's axe and the neatherd's goad, just
as though they had been suspended on the wall by some invisible laborer
after a good day's work. yonder were a sheaf of arrows and a stout bow
strangely shaped, a hunting horn, and there again a long withy peeled
for fishing, and a broad, rusty iron sword (that truly looked as if it
had not been used for some time) over against a leash for dogs, and a
herdsman's cowl, with other strange things festooning the walls of this
dim little place.

among these possessions of some many-minded men were shelves i noted
with clay vessels of sorts upon them, and bunches of dried herbs and
roots and apples put by for the winter, and, more curious still, in the
safest niche away in the quietest corner were stored up in many tiers
more than a score of vellums and manuscripts, all neatly rolled and
tagged with colored ribbons, and wound in parchments and embroidered
gold and colored leathers, forming such a library of learning as only
the very studious could possess in those days. beyond them were flasks
and essences, and dried herbs, and ink-horns, and sheafs of uncut reeds
for writing, with such other various items as astonished me by their
incongruous complexity and novelty.

all these lay in the shadows most commendable to my weakly eyes. as for
the center of the room, i now began to notice it was a brilliant golden
haze, a nebulous cloud of yellow light, to my enfeebled sense without
form or meaning, whence emerged constantly a thin metallic hammering,
as though it might be some kindly invisible spirit were forging a
golden idea into a human hope behind that shining veil.

i shut my eyes for a minute or two to rest them, and then looked again.
the haze had now concentrated itself into a circle of light, radiating,
as i perceived, from a lamp hung from the low roof, and under that
pale, modest radiance, seated at a trestle table, was a venerable
white-bearded old man. never, so far, perhaps, in long centuries of
intercourse with brave but licentious peoples, had a face like his
been before me. it was restful to look at, a new page in history it
seemed, full of a peace which had hitherto passed all understanding and
a dignity beyond description or definition. before him, on the board,
was a brilliant mass of shining white metal, and, as he eagerly bent
over it, absorbed in his work, his thin and scholarly hands, wielding
a chisel and a mallet and obeying the art that was in his soul, caused
the rhythmed hammering i had noticed, while they forced with loving
zeal the bright chips and spiral flakes from the splendid dazzling
crucifix he was shaping.

and all behind that lean and kindly anchorite the black shadows
flickered on the walls of his lonely cell, and his little fire of
sticks burned dimly on the open hearth, and the shining dust of his
labor sparkled in his grizzly beard as brightly as the reverent
pleasure in his eyes while the symbol before him took form and shape.

so pleasant was he to look upon, i could have left him long
undisturbed, but presently a sigh involuntarily escaped me. thereon,
looking up for the first time from his work, the recluse peered all
round him into the recesses, and, seeing nothing, fell to his task
once more. again i sighed, and then he arose without emotion or fear,
and stared intently into the shadows where i lay. in vain i essayed to
speak--my tongue clove to my mouth, and naught but a husky rattle broke
the stillness. at that sound he took down the lamp and came forward,
wonder and astonishment working in his face; and when, as the light
shone on me, with a great effort my head was turned to one side, even
that placid monk started back and stood trembling a little by the table.

but he soon mastered his weakness and advanced again, muttering, as he
did so, excitedly to himself, "he was right! he was right!" and when at
last my tongue was loosened i said:

"who was right, thou gray-bearded chiseler?"

"who? why, alfred. alfred, the son of ethelwulf, the son of
egbert--alfred the great thane of england!"

"one of your british princelings, i suppose," i muttered huskily. "and
wherein was he so right?"

"he was right, o marvelous returner from the dim seas of the past,
in that he prophesied your return! to him you owe this shelter and
preservation."

"all this may be so, my host," i replied, beginning to feel more myself
again; "but it matters not. i fought a stubborn fight last night, and i
was carried away by a midnight torrent. if you have sheltered and dried
me, and"--with a sudden sinking of my voice--"if you have protected
the little maid i had with me, then i am grateful to you, alfred or
no alfred," and i threw off a mountain of moldy-seeming rags and
coverlets, and staggered up.

but that worthy monk was absolutely dumb with astonishment, and as i
tottered to my feet, holding out to him a gaunt, trembling hand, brown
with the dust of ages, and drunkenly reeled across his floor, he edged
away, while the long hair of his silvery head bristled with wonder.

"my son, my son!" he gasped at length, over the shining crucifix; "this
is not so; none of us know the beginning of that sleep you have slept;
that night of yours is of immeasurable antiquity. history has forgotten
your very battles, and your maid, i fear, has long since passed into
common, immaterial dust."

this was too much, and suddenly, overwhelmed by the tide of hot
phœnician passion, i shook my fist in his face, and swearing in my
bitter roman that he lied, that he was a grizzle-bearded villain with a
heart as black as his tongue, i staggered to the doorway, and pushing
wide the hinges tottered out on to a grassy promontory just as the
primrose flush of day was breaking over the hilltops. there, holding
on to a post, for my legs were very weak and frail, and peering into
the purple shadows, i lifted my voice in anger and fear, and shouted in
that green loneliness, "numidea! numidea!" then waited with a beating,
beating heart until--thin, sullen, derisive--from the hills across the
ravine came back the soulless response:

"numidea! numidea!"

i could not believe it. i would not think they could not hear, and
stamping in my impatience, "electra!" i shouted, "numidea! 'tis
phra--phra the friendless who calls to you!" then again bent an ear to
listen, until, from the void shadows of the purple hills, through the
pale vapors of the morning mist, there came again in melancholy-wise
the answer:

"'tis phra, phra the friendless who calls to you!"--and i dropped my
face into my hands and bent my head and dimly knew then that i was
jettisoned once more on the shore of some unknown and distant time!

it was of no use to grieve; and when the kindly hand of the monk was
placed upon my shoulder i submitted to his will, and was led back to
the cell, and there he gave me to drink of a sweet, thin decoction that
greatly soothed these high-strung nerves.

then many were the questions that studious man would have me answer,
and busy his wonder and awe at my assertions.

"what emperor rules here now?" i said, lying melancholy on my elbow on
the couch.

"none, my son. there are no emperors but the sovereign pontiff now--may
st. peter be his guide!"

"no emperor! why, old man, honorius held sway in rome that night i went
to sleep!"

"honorius!" said the monk, incredulously stopping his excited pacings
to stare at me; and he took down a portly tome of history and ran his
fingers over the leaves, until, about midway through that volume, they
settled on a passage.

"look! look! you marvelous man!" he cried; "all this was history before
you slumbered; and all this, nigh as much again, has been added while
you slept! five hundred years of solid life!--a thousand changing
seasons has the germ of existence been dormant in that mighty bulk of
yours! oh! 'tis past belief, and had you not been my lodger for so long
a time, though all so short in comparison, i would not hear of it."

"and how has the world spun all this period?" i said, with dense
persistence. "who is consul now in gaul? and are all my jolly friends
of the tenth legion still quartered where i left them?"--and i
mentioned the name of the town by which electra lived.

"i tell thee, youth," the priest replied quite hotly, "there is no
consul, there are no legions. all your barbarous romans are long since
swept to hell, and the noble harold is here anointed king of saxon
england."

"i never heard of him," i said coldly.

"perhaps not, but, by the cowl of st. dunstan! he flourishes
nevertheless," responded my saintly entertainer.

"and is this harold of yours successor to the other thane, alfred, whom
you describe as taking such a kindly interest in me?"

"yes; but many generations separate them. it was the great bretwalda
you have mentioned who, tradition says, once found you inanimate, yet
living, in a fisherman's hut where he sheltered one day from a storm,
and, struck by the marvel and the tale of the poor folk that their
ancestors had long ago dragged you from a swollen river in their nets,
and that you slumbered on without alteration or change from year to
year, from father to son, there on your dusty shelf in their peat smoke
and broken gear, he bought and gave you to the holy prelate at the
blessed cathedral of canterbury, whence you came a few months ago into
my hands. all else there is to know, my strangely gifted son," the monk
went on, "is locked in the darkness of that long slumber, and such acts
of your other life as your vacant mind may recall."

this seemed a wonderful thing, very briefly told, but it was obviously
all there was to hear, and sufficient after a style. the old man said
that, having a mind for curiosities, and observing me once in danger of
being broken up as rubbish by careless hands, he had claimed me, and
brought the strange living mummy here to his cell "on the hill senlac,
by the narrow english straits."

"that, inscrutable one," he added with a twinkle in his eye, "was only
some months ago, and the mess i made my hut in cleaning and wiping you
down was wonderful. yonder little stream you hear prattling in the
valley ran dusty for hours with your washings, and your form was one
shapeless bulk of cobwebs and dishonored wrappings. many a time as i
peeled from you the alternate layers of peat smoke and rags with which
generations of neglect had shrouded that body, did i think to roll you
into the valley as you were, and see what proportions the weather and
the crows would make of it. but better counsels prevailed, and for
seven days you have been free and daily rubbed with scented oils!"

i thanked him meetly, and hoped i had not been a reluctant patient?

"a more docile never breathed."

"not an expensive lodger afterward?"

"never was there one more frugal, nor one who less criticized his
entertainment!"

then it was the good monk's turn, and his wise and kindly eyes sparkled
with pleasure and astonishment as i told him in gratitude such tales
of the early times--drew for him such brilliant, fiery pictures on the
dark background of the past--illumined and vivified his dry histories
with the colors of my awakening memory, and set all the withered
puppets of his chronicles a-dancing in the tinsel and the glitter of
their actual lives; until, over the lintel of his doorway and under
the lappets of his roof, there came the first thin, fine fingers of
the morning sunshine, trickling into our dim arena thronged thus with
shadowy imagery, and playing lovingly, about the great silver crucifix
that lay thus ablaze under it in the gloom! then i slept again for two
days and two nights as lightly and happily as a child.

*       *       *       *       *

when i awoke i was both hungry and well. indeed, it was the scent of
breakfast that roused me. but, alas! the meal was none of mine. the
little table had been cleared, and at it, on clean white napkins, were
places for three or four people. there were wooden platters with steel
knives upon them, oaten loaves, great wooden tankards of wine and mead,
with fish and fowl flesh in abundance. surely my entertainer was going
to turn out a jolly fellow, now the night's vigils were over! but as
i speculated in my retired couch there fell the beat of marching men,
a clatter of arms outside and a shouting of many voices in clamorous
welcome, the ringing of stirrup-irons and the champing of bits, and
then, to my infinite astonishment, in stalked as comely a man as i had
ever seen, and leading by the hand a fair, pale, black-haired girl, who
looked jaded and red in her eyes.

"there, my adeliza," he said; "now dry those lashes of yours and cheer
up. what! a norman girl like you, and weeping because two hosts stand
faced for battle! what will our saxon maids say to these shining drops?"

"oh, harold!" the girl exclaimed, "it is not conflict i fear, or i
would not have come hither to you, braving your anger; but think of the
luckless chance that brings my father from normandy in arms against
my saxon love! think of my fears, think how i dread that either side
should win--surely grief so complicated should claim pardon for these
simple tears."

"well, well," said he--whom i, unobserved in the shadows, now
recognized as the english monarch himself--"if we are bound to die, we
can do so but once, and at least we will breakfast first," and down
he sat, signing the girl to get herself another stool in rough saxon
manner.

and a very good meal he made of it, putting away the toasted ortolans
and cheese, and waging war with his fingers and dagger upon all the
viands, washing them down with constant mighty draughts from the wooden
flagons, and this all in a jolly, light-hearted way that was very
captivating. ever and anon he called to the "churls" outside, or gave a
hasty order to his captains with his mouth full of meat and bread, or
put some dainty morsel into the idle fingers of his damsel, as though
breakfasting was the chief thing in life, and his kingdom were not
tottering to the martial tread of an invader.

but even gallant harold, the last king of the saxons, had finished
presently, and then donning his pointed casque and his flowing
silken-filigreed cloak, thrusting his whinger into his jeweled girdle,
he threw his round steel target on his back--then held out both
his arms. whether or not his norman love, the reluctant seal of a
broken promise, had always loved him, it is not for me to say, but,
woman-like, she loved him at the losing, and flew to him and was
enfolded tight into his ample chest, and mixed her raven tresses with
his yellow english hair, and sobbed and clung to him, and took and gave
a hundred kisses, and was so sweet and tearful that my inmost heart was
moved.

when harold had gone out, and when presently the clatter of arms and
shouting proved he was moving off to the field of eventful battle,
adeliza the proud bowed her head upon the table, and abandoned herself
to so wild a grief that i was greatly impelled to rise and comfort her.
but she would not be consoled, even by the ministrations of two of her
waiting maidens, who soon entered the place; and seeing this i took an
opportunity when all three were blending their tears to slip out into
the open air.

there i found my friendly saxon monk in great tribulation, with a
fragment of vellum in his hand.

"ah, my son," he said--"the very man. look here, the air is heavy with
event. yonder, under the sheen of the sun, william of normandy is
encamped with sixty thousand of his cruel adventurers, and there, down
there among the trees, you see the gallant harold and his straggling
array, sorry and muddy with long marching, on the way to oppose them.
but the king has not half his force with him, nor a fourth as many as
he needs! take this vellum, and, if you ever put a buskin in speed
to the grass, run now for the credit of england and for the sake of
history--run for that ridge away there behind us, where you will find
the good earl of mercia and several thousand men encamped--and, if not
asleep, most probably stuffing themselves with food and drink," he
added bitterly under his breath. "give him this, and say harold will
not be persuaded, say that unless the reserves march at once the fight
will be fought without them--and then i think dane and saxon will be
chaff before the wind of retribution. run! my son--run for the good
cause, and for saxon england!"

without a word i took the vellum and crammed it into my bosom and
spun round on my heels and fled down the hillside, and breasted the
dewy tangles of fern and brambles, and glided through the thickets,
and flying from ridge to ridge, and leaping and running as though the
silver wings of mercury were on my heels, in an hour i dashed up the
far hillside, and, panting and exhausted, threw down the missive under
the tawny beard of the great earl himself.

that scion of saxon royalty was, as the monk had foreseen, absorbed in
the first meal of the day, but he was too much of a soldier, though,
like all his race, a desperate good trencherman, to let such a matter
as my errand grow cold, and no sooner had he read the scroll and put me
a shrewd question or two than the order went forth for his detachments
to arm and march at once. but only a captain of many fights knows how
slow reluctant troops can be in such case. surely, i thought, as i
stood by with crossed arms watching the preparations it was none of my
business to help--surely a nation, though gallant enough, which quits
its breakfast board so tardily, and takes such a perilous time to
cross-garter its legs, and buckle on its blades, and peak its beard,
and tag out its baldric so nicely, when the invader is on foot--surely
such a nation is ripe to the fall! and these comely english troops
were doubly weary this morning, for they were fresh, as one of them
told me, from a hard fight in the far north of the kingdom, where
harold had just overthrown and slain hardrada, king of norway, and the
unduteous tosti, harold's own brother. less wonder, then, i found them
travel-stained and weary, no marvel for the once they were so slow to
my fatal invitation.

it was noon before the english earl led off the van of his men, and
an hour later before i had seen the last of them out of the camp and
followed reflective in the rear--a place that never yet sorted with
my mood--wondering, with the happy impartiality of my circumstances,
whether it were best this morning to be invader or invaded.

when we had gone a mile or two through the leafy tangles, a hush fell
upon the troop with which i rode, and then with a shout we burst into
a run, for up from the valley beyond came the unmistakable sound of
conflict and turmoil. we breasted the last ridge, i and two hundred
men, and there, suddenly emerging into the open, was the bloody valley
of senlac beneath us, and the sunny autumn sea beyond, and at our
feet right and left the wail and glitter and dust of nearly finished
battle--harold had fought without us, and we saw the quick-coming
forfeit he had to pay.

the unhappy saxons down there on the pleasant grassy undulations and
among the yellow gorse and ling stood to it like warriors of good
mettle, but already the day was lost. the earl and his tardy troops had
been merged into the general catastrophe, and my handful would have
been of naught avail. the english array was broken and formless, galled
by the swarming norman bowmen, the twang of whose strings we could
mark even up here, and fiercely assailed by foot and horsemen. in the
center alone the english stood stubbornly shoulder to shoulder around
the peaked flag, at whose foot harold himself was grimly repelling the
ceaseless onset of the foeman.

but alas for harold, alas for the curly-headed son of ethelwulf, and
all the princes and peers with him!

we saw a mighty mass of foreign cavalry creeping round the shoulder
of the hill, like the shadow of a raincloud upon a sunny landscape:
we saw the thousand gonfalons of the spoilers fluttering in the wind:
we saw the glitter on the great throng of northern chivalry that
crowded after the black charger of william of normandy and the sacred
flag--accursed ensign--that toustain held aloft: we saw their sweeping
charge, and then when it was passed, the battle was gone and done, the
saxon power was a hundred little groups dying bravely in different
corners of the field.

the men with me that luckless afternoon melted away into the woods,
and i turned my steps once more to the little hill above senlac and my
hermit's cell.

there the ill news had been brought by a wounded soldier, and the women
were filling the evening air with cries and weeping. all that night
they wept and wailed, harold's wife leading them, and when dawning came
nothing would serve but she must go and find her husband's body. much
the good monk tried to dissuade her, but to no purpose, and swathing
herself in a man's long cloak, with one fair maiden likewise disguised,
and me for a guide, before there was yet any light in the sky the brave
norman girl set out.

and sorry was our errand and grim our success. the field of battle was
deserted, save of dead and dying men. on the dark wind of the night
went up to heaven from it a great fitful groan, as all the wounded
groaned in unison to their unseen miseries. alas! those tender charges
of mine had never seen till now the harvest field of war laid out with
its swaths of dead and dying! often they hesitated on that gloomy walk
and hid their faces as the fitful clouds drifted over the scene, and
the changing light and shadows seemed to put a struggling ghastly life
into the heaps of mangled corpses. everywhere, as we threaded the mazes
of destruction or stepped unwitting in the darkness into pools of blood
and mire, were dead warriors in every shape and contortion, lying all
asprawl, or piled up one on top of another, or sleeping pleasantly in
dreamless dissolution against the red sides of stricken horses. and
many were the pale, blood-besmeared faces of princes and chiefs my
white-faced ladies turned up to the starlight, and many were the sodden
yellow curls they lifted with icy fingers from the dead faces of thanes
and franklins, until in an hour the norman girl, who had gone a little
apart from us, suddenly stood still, and then up to the clear, black
vault of heaven there went such a clear, piercing shriek as hushed even
the very midnight sorrows of the battlefield itself.

the king was found!

and editha, the handmaiden, too, made her find presently, for there,
over the dead prince's feet, their left hands still clasping each as
when they had died, were her father and her two stalwart brothers.

never did silenter courtiers than we six sit at a monarch's feet until
the day should break; and then we who lived covered the comely faces
with the hems of their saxon tunics, and were away as fast as we could
go to the norman camp, that the poor princess-girl might beg a trophy
of her victorious father.

we entered the camp without harm, but had to stand by until the
conqueror should leave his tent and enter the rough shelter that had
already been erected for him. here, while we waited, a young knight,
guessing editha's sex through her long cloak, roughly pulled down the
kerchief she was holding across her face. whereupon i struck him so
heavily with my fist that, for a minute, he reeled back against the
horse he was leading, and then out came his falchion, and out came
mine, and we fell upon each other most heartily.

but before a dozen passes had been made the bystanders separated us,
and at the same moment the normans set up a shout, and the brand-new
english tyrant strode out of his tent, and, encircled by a glittering
throng, entered the open audience-hall. adeliza dropped her white veil
as he sat himself down, and called to him, and ran to the foot of his
chair, and wept and knelt, so that even the stern son of robert the
devil was moved, and took her to him, and stroked her hair, and soothed
and called her, in norman-french, his pretty daughter, and promised her
the first boon she could think of.

and that boon was the body of harold _infelix_.

turn back the pages of history, and you will see that she had her wish,
and waltham abbey its kingly patron.[1]

[1] exact historians say it was harold's mother who found his body upon
the field of battle, and offered william its weight in gold for it. but
our narrator ought to know the truth better than any of them.

meanwhile, a knight led the weeping princess away to her father's
tent, but when i and editha would have followed two iron-coated rogues
crossed their halberds in our path.

"not so fast there, my bulky champion!" called william the bastard to
me. "what is this i heard about your striking a norman for glancing at
yonder silly saxon wench? by st. denis! your girls will have to learn
to be more lenient! whence come you? what was your father's name?"

"i hardly know," i said, without thinking.

"ah! a too common ignorance nowadays!" sneered the conqueror, turning
to his laughing knights.

whereon wrathfully i replied: "at least, my father never mistook, under
cover of the night, a serving-wench for a princess!"

the shaft took the soldier in a very tender spot, and his naturally
sallow countenance blanched slowly to a hideous yellow as a smile went
round the steel circle of his martial courtiers at my too telling
answer. yet even then i could not but do his iron will justice for
the stern resolution with which the passion was restrained in that
cold and cruel face, and when he turned and spoke in the ear of his
marshal standing near there was no tremor of anger or compassion in
the inflexible voice with which he ordered me to be taken outside and
hanged "to the nearest tree that will bear him" in ten minutes.

"as for the saxon wenchhere, des ormeux"--turning to a grim villain
in steel harness at his side--"this girl has a good fief, they say: she
and it are yours for the asking!"

"my mighty liege," said the norman, dropping on one knee, "never was
a gift more generously given. i will hold the land to your eternal
service, and make the maid free of my tent to-day, and to-morrow we
will look up a priest for the easing of her conscience."

loudly the assembled soldiers laughed as des ormeux pounced upon the
shrieking editha and bore her out of one door, while, in spite of
my fierce struggles to get at him, i was hustled into the open from
another.

they dragged me into a green avenue between the huts of the invader's
camp while they went for a rope to hang me with. and as i stood thus
loosely guarded and waiting among them, down the norman ravisher came
pacing toward us on his war-horse, bound toward his tent, with my white
saxon flower fast gripped in front of him.

oh, but he was proud to think himself possessed of a slice of fair
english soil so easily, and to have his courtship made so simple for
him, and he looked this way and that, with an accursed grin upon his
face, no more heeding the tears and struggles of his victim than the
falcon cares for the stricken pigeon's throes. when they came opposite
to us editha saw me and threw out her hands and shrieked to me, and,
when i turned away my eyes and did not move, surely it seemed as
though her heart would have broken.

three more paces the war-horse made, and then, with the spring of a
leopard thirsting for blood, i was alongside of him, another bound
and i was on the crupper behind, and there, quicker than thought,
quicker than the lightning strikes down the pine-tree, i had lifted
the norman's steel shoulder-plate, and stabbed him with my long, keen
dagger so fiercely in the back that the point came out under his
mid-rib, and the red blood spurted to his horse's ears. quicker, too,
than it takes to tell i had gripped the maiden from the spoiler's dying
hands, and, pushing his bloody body from the saddle, had thrown my own
legs over the crescent peak, and before the gaping scullion soldiers
comprehended my bold stroke for freedom i had turned the horse's head
and was thundering through the camp toward the free green woods beyond.

and we reached them safely; a rascal or two let fly their cross-bows at
us as we fled by, and i heard the bolts hum merrily past my ears, but
they did no harm; and there was mounting and galloping and shouting,
but the mailed normans were wonderfully slow in their stirrups! i
laughed to see them scrambling and struggling into their seats, two or
three men to every warrior who got safely up, and we soon left them far
behind. down into the dip we rode, my good horse spurning in his stride
the still fresh bodies of yesterday's fighters, and spinning the empty
helmets, and clattering through all the broken litter of the bitter
contest, until we swept up the inland slopes into the stunted birch
and hazels, and then--turning for a moment to shake my fist at the
nearest of the distant normans--i headed into the leafy shelter, and
was speedily free from all chance of pursuit.

then, and not before, was there time to take a glance at my beautiful
prize, lying so gentle and light upon my breast. alas! every tint of
color had gone from her fair features, and she lay there in my arms,
fainting and pulseless. i loosened her neckscarf. "so!" i said, "fair
saxon blossom, this is destiny, and you and i are henceforth to be
joined together by the wondrous links of fate"--and, stooping down as
we paced through the pleasant green and white flicker of the silent
wood, i endorsed the immutable will of chance with a kiss upon her
forehead.

presently she recovered, and all that day we rode forward through the
endless vistas of the southern woods by bridle tracks and swine paths,
until at nightfall, far from other shelters, we halted among the rocks
and hollows of a little eminence. no doubt my gentle comrade would
have preferred a more peopled habitation, but there was none in all
that mighty wilderness, so she, like a wise girl, submitted without
complaint to that which she could not avoid.

there was naught much to tell you of this evening, but it lives forever
in my memory for one particular which consorted strangely with the
thoughts the flight with and rescue of editha had aroused. i had found
her a roomy hollow in the rocks, and there had cut with my dagger and
made a bed of rushes, built a fire, and got her some roots to eat, and
when darkness fell we talked for a time by the cheerful blaze.

without surprise i heard that though true saxon in name and face, there
was some british blood in her veins--a fact, indeed, of which i had
been certain without her assurance. then she went on to tell, with
tearful pauses, of the home and broad lands of which she was now lady
paramount, as well as of the gallant kinsman lying out yonder dead in
the night dew, and wept and sighed in gentle melancholy, yet without
the wild, inconsolable grief latter times have taught to women, until
presently those tearful blue eyes grew heavier and heavier, and the
shapely chin dropped in grief and weariness upon her white breast, and
editha of voewood slept in the hands of the stranger.

then i went out and looked at the blackness of the night. over the
somber forest the shadowy pall of the evening was spread, and a
thousand stars gleamed brightly on every hand. very still and strange
was that unbroken fastness after the red turmoil of yesterday, with
nothing disturbing the silence but the cry of an owl to its mate across
the coppices, the tinkle of a falling streamlet, and now and then the
long, hungry howling of a wolf, or, nearer by, the sharp barking of
the foxes. i fed my horse, then went in and pulled the fire together,
and fell a-ruminating, my chin on my hands, upon a hundred episodes of
happiness and fear.

"oh, strange eternal powers who set the goings and comings of humanity,
what is the meaning of this wild riddle you are reading me?" i said
presently aloud to myself. "oh! hapi and amenti, dark goddesses of the
egyptians--oh! atropos, lachesis, clotho, fatal sisters whom the romans
dread--mista, skogula, zernebock, of these dark saxon shadows--why am i
thus chosen for this uncertain immortality, when will this long drama,
this changeful history of my being, end?"

as i muttered thus to myself i glanced at the white girl sleeping in
the ruddy blaze, and saw her chest heave, and then--strange to tell,
stranger to hear--with a sound like the whisper of a distant sea her
lips parted, and there came unmistakably the word:

"never!"

perhaps she was but dreaming of that amorous norman's fierce proposals,
and so again i mused.

"is it possible some unfinished spell of that red high priestess of
the druids plays this sport with me? is it possible blodwen's abiding
affection--stronger than time and changes--accompanies me from age
to age in these her sweet ambassadors forever crossing my path? tell
me, you comely sleeper, tell me your embassy, which is it that lasts
longest, life or love?"

slowly again, to my surprise, those lips were parted, and across the
silent cavern came, beyond mistake or question, the word--"love!"

at this very echo of my thoughts i stared hard at her who answered so
appropriately, but there could be no doubt editha was asleep with an
unusually deep and perfect forgetfulness, and when i had assured myself
of this it was only possible for me to suppose those whispered words
were some delusion, the echo of my questioning.

again i brooded, and then presently looked up, and there--by thor and
odin! 'twas as i write it--between me and the bare earth and tangled
rootlets of the cavern side, over against the fitful sparkle of the
fire, was a thin impalpable form that oscillated gently to the draughts
creeping along the floor, and grew taller and taller, and took mortal
air and shape, and rose out of nebulous indistinctness into a fine
ethereal substance, and was clothed and visaged by the concentration of
its impalpable material, and there at last, smiling and gentle, in the
flicker of the camp-fire, the gray shadow of my british princess stood
before me!

that man was never brave who has not feared, and then for a moment i
feared, leaping to my feet and staggering back against the wall under
the terrible sweetness of those eyes that burned into my being with a
relentless fire that i could not have shunned if i would, and would not
if i could. for some time i was thus motionless and fascinated, and
then the gentle shadow, who had been regarding me intently, appeared
to perceive the cause of my enthrallment, and lifting a shapely arm of
lavender-colored essence for a minute veiled the terrible bewitchment
of her face. shrewd, observant shadow! as she did so i was myself
again--my blood welled into my empty veins, my heart knocked fiercely
at my ribs, and when blodwen lowered her hand there seemed to me
endless enchantment but nothing dreadful in the glance of kindly wonder
with which her eyes met mine.

surely it was as strange an encounter as ever there had been--the
little rocky recess all ruddy and shadowy in the dancing flames; the
silent white saxon girl there on the heaped-up rushes, her breast
heaving like a summer sea with a long, smooth undulation; and i against
the stones, one hand on my dagger and the other outspread fearful
on the wall, scarce knowing whether i were brave or not, while over
against the eddying smoke--calm, passive, happy, immutable, was that
winsome presence, shining in our dusky shelter with a tender violet
light, such as was never kindled by mortal means.

when i found voice to speak i poured forth my longings and pent-up
spirit in many a reckless question, but to all of them the princess
made no answer. then i spread my arms and thought to grasp her, and
ever as they nearly closed upon her she moved backward, now here and
now there, mocking my foolish hope and passing impalpable over the
floor, always gentle and compassionate, until the uselessness of the
pursuit at last dawned upon me, and i stood irresolute.

i little doubt that immaterial immortal would have mustered courage or
strength to speak to me presently, but the sleeping girl sighed heavily
at this moment and seemed so ill at ease that, without a thought, i
turned to look at her. when my eyes sought the opposite side of the
fire again the presence was not half herself: under my very glance she
was being absorbed once more by the dusky air. to let her go like
that was all against my will, and, leaping to those printless feet,
"princess! wife!" i called, "stay another moment!" and as i said it i
swept my arms round the last vestige of her airy kirtle, and drew into
my bosom an armful of empty air!

she had gone, and not a sign was left--not a palm's breadth of that
lovely sheen shone against the wall as i arose ashamed from my knee and
noticed editha was awaking.

"my kind protector," said that damsel, "i have been feeling so
strange--not dreaming quite, but feeling as though some one were
borrowing existence of me, yet leaving in my body the blood and pulse
of life. now, how can this be? i must surely have been very tired
yesterday."

"no doubt you were, fair franklin," i answered. "yesterday was such a
day as well excuses your weariness. sleep again, and when the sun rises
in an hour you shall rise with it as fresh as any of the little birds
that already preen themselves." so she slept--and presently i too.

*       *       *       *       *

all the next day we rode on through endless glades and briery paths
toward editha's home, and as we went, i afoot and she meekly perched
upon our mighty norman charger, i wooed her with a brevity which the
times excused, and poured my nimble lover wit into ears accustomed only
to the sluggish flattery of woodland thanes and princely swineherds.
and first she blushed and would not listen, and then she sighed and
switched the low wet boughs of oak and hazel as we passed along, and
then she let me say my say with downcast, averted eyes, and a sweet
reluctance which told me i might stoutly push the siege.

as we went we picked up now and then a straggling soldier or two from
the fight behind us, and now and then a petty chieftain joined us,
until presently we wound through the bracken toward voewood, a very
goodly train.

editha had got a palfrey and i my horse again; but as she neared her
home the thought of its desolation weighed heavier and heavier upon her
tender nature. she would not eat and would not speak, and at last took
her to crying, and so cried until we saw, aglint through the oak-stems,
a very fair homestead and ample, with broad lands around, and kine and
deer about it, and all that could make it fair and pleasant. this was
her voewood; and when the servants came running to meet us (knowing
nothing of the fight or its results, and thinking we were their master
and his sons come again) with waving caps and shouts of pleasure, it
was too much for the overwrought girl. she threw up her white hands,
and, with a cry of pain and grief, slipped fainting from her palfrey
before us all.

then might you have seen a score of saddles featly emptied to the
service of the heiress! down jumped offa the dane, whose unchanged
doublet was still red to his chin with mud and norman gore. down
jumped edred and egbert, those blue-eyed brothers who had left their
lands by the northern sea a month ago to follow harold's luckless
banner; torquil, the grim, and wulfhere of the white beard, sprang
to the ground: and clywin the fair welsh princeling, and his shadow,
idwal ap cynan, the harper-warrior, vaulted to their feet--spent and
battle-weary as they were, with many another. but, lighter and quicker
than any of them, phra the phœnician had leaped to earth, and stood
there astride of the senseless girl, his hand upon his dagger-hilt, and
scowling round that soldier circle wrathful to think that any other but
he should touch her!

then he took her up, as if it were a mother with a sleeping babe,
and the serfs uncapped and stood back on either hand, and the grim
warriors fell in behind, and so editha came home, her loose arms
hanging down and her long bright hair all adrift over the broad
shoulders of the strangest, most many-adventured soldier in that motley
band.

chapter vi

when i come to look back upon that saxon period, spent in the green
shades of my sweet franklin's homestead, it seems, perhaps, that
never was there a time so peaceful before in the experience of this
passion-tossed existence! we hunted and we hawked, we feasted and we
lay abask in the sunshine of a jolly, idle life all these luxurious
months, drinking scorn and confusion amid our nightly flagons to remote
care and (as it seemed) remoter normans.

but first to tell you how i won the right to lord it over these merry
saxon churls and dissolute thanes. editha had hardly come to her home
and dried, in a day or two, her weeping eyes, when all the noble
vagrants from yonder battle were up in arms to woo her. never was maid
so sued! from morning till night there was no rest or peace. from the
uppermost bower looking over the fair english glades, down into the
thickets of nut and hazel, the air reeked of love and petitions. the
mighty dane, like a sick bear, slept upon her curtained threshold
and growled amorousness into her timid ear before the sun was up.
the welsh prince wooed her all her breakfast-time, and his tawny
harper spent many a golden morning in outlining his noble patron's
genealogy. in faith--ap tudor, ap griffith, ap morgan, ap huge, and i
know not how many others, it seemed all had a hand in the making of
that paragon--but editha blushed and said she feared one saxon girl
was all too few for so many. they besought her up and down, night and
morning, full and empty, to wed them. the english princelings dogged
her footsteps when she went afield, and torquil and wulfhere, those
bandaged lovers, were ready for her with sighs and plaintive proposals
when she came flitting, frightened and fearful, home through the
bracken.

how could this end but in one way for the defenseless girl? she was
sued so much and sued so hot that one day she came creeping like a
hunted animal to the turret nook where i sat brooding over my fortunes,
and, timorous and shy, begged me to help her. i stood up and touched
her yellow disheveled hair, and told her there was but one way--and
editha knew it as well as any one--and had made her choice and slipped
into my arms and was happy.

that was as noisy a wedding as ever had been in voewood. editha freed
a hundred serfs, and all day long the noise of files on their iron
collars echoed through her halls. she fed at the door every miscreant
or beggar who could crawl or hobble there, and remitted her taxes to a
score of poorer villains.

in the hall such noisy revelers as the rejected suitors surely never
were seen. they began that wedding feast in the morning, and it was
not finished by night. to me, who had so lately supped amid the costly
detail, the magnificent and cultivated license of a patrician roman
table, these saxon rioters seemed scrambling, hungry dogs. where
electra would taunt her haughty courtiers over loaded tables which the
art of three empires had furnished, firing her cruel, witty arrows of
spite and arrogance from her rose-strewn couches, these rough, uncivil
woodland peers but wallowed in their ceaseless flow of muddy ale,
gorged themselves to sleep with the gross flesh of their acorn-fed
swine, and sang such songs and told such tales as made even me,
indifferent, to scowl upon them and wonder that their kinswoman and her
handmaids could sit and seem unwotting of their gross, obscene, and
noisy revels.

and late that night blood was nearly spilled upon the oaken floor of
voewood. the thanes had fairly pocketed their disappointment, but now,
deep in drink and stuffed with food and courage, they began to eye me
and my thin-hid scorn askance, and then presently, like the mutter
of a quick-coming storm, came the whisper, "why should she fall to
the stranger? why? why?" it flew round the tables like wildfire, and
half-emptied beakers were set down, and untasted food stopped on its
way to the mouth, and then--all on a sudden, the drunken chiefs were
on foot advancing to the upper table, where i sat by editha's right
hand, their daggers agleam in the torchlight shining upon their red and
angry faces as they came tumbling and shouting toward us, "death to the
black-haired stranger! voewood for a saxon! why should he win her?"

'tis not my fashion to let the foeman come far to seek me, and i was up
in an instant--overturning the table with all its wines and meats--and,
whipping out my sword, i leaped into the middle of the rushy space
before them.

"why?" i shouted. "why? you drunken, norman-beaten dogs! why? because,
by thor and odin! by all the bones of hengist and his brother! i can
throw a straighter javelin, and whirl a heavier sword, and sit a
fiercer steed than any of you. why? because my heart is stronger than
any that ever beat under your dirty scullion doublets. why? because i
scorn, and spit upon, and deride you!"

it was braggart boasting, but i noticed the saxons liked their talk
of that complexion. and in this case it was successful. the princes
stood hesitating and staring as i towered before them, fiery and
disdainful, in the red gleaming banquet lights; until presently the
youngest there burst into a merry laugh to see them all thus at bay,
chewing the hilts of their angry daggers, and each one waiting for his
neighbor to prove himself the braver, by dying first upon my weapon.
that laugh had hardly reached the ruddy oaken rafters overhead when
it was joined by a score of others, and in a moment those wilful
saxon lordlings were all laughing and jerking back their steels, and
scrambling into their supper-places as if they had not broken their
fast since morning, and i were their mother's son.

deep were their flagons that night, after the women had stolen away,
and idwal ap howell filled the hall with wild welsh harping that
stirred my soul like a battle-call; for it was in my dear british
tongue, and full of the color, light, and the life that had illuminated
the first page of my long pilgrimage. and the saxon gleemen, not to be
outdone, each sang the song that pleased him best; and the welshman
strove to drown them with his harping; and the thanes sang, all at
once, whatever songs were noisiest and most licentious. mighty was the
fire that roared up the open hearthplace; deep was the breathing of
vanquished warriors from under the tables; red was the spilled wine
upon the floor--when presently they put me upon a tressel, and, bearing
me round the hall in discordant triumph, finally bore me away to the
inner corridors, and left me at a portal where i never yet had entered!

there is but little to say of that quiet saxon rest that befell me in
pleasant voewood. between each line i pen you must suppose an episode
of pleasure. in the springtime, when the woods were shot with a carpet
of blue and yellow flowers, we lay a-basking in the sunny angles or
rode out to count our swine and fallow deer. in the summer, when all
editha's mighty woodlands were like fair endless colonnades, we basked
amid the flickering shadows and watched the sunny sheen upon the
treetops, to the orchestra of little birds. and autumn, that touched
the vassals' corn-clearings with yellow, saw my proud norman charger
grow fat and gross with new grain. september rains and mists rusted my
silent weapon into its sheath; even winter, that heard the woodman's
axe upon the forest trees, and saw bird and beast and men and kine
draw in to the gentle bounty of my white-handed lady, was but a long,
inglorious holiday of another sort.

many and many a time, in those merry months, did this phœnician
laugh to his mirror to see how fitly he could wear upon his
eastern-british-roman body the danish-saxon-english tunic! it was all
of fine linen the franklin's own fair fingers had spun, and pointed
and tasseled and parti-color, and his legs were cross-gartered to his
knees, and his little luncheon-dagger hung by his jeweled belt, and
a fillet of pure english gold bound down the long black locks that
fell upon his shoulders. every morning editha combed them out with her
silver comb, and double-peaked his beard, kissing and saying it was the
best in all voewood. he had more servants than necessities in those
times, and almost his only grievance was a lack of wants.

the normans for long had left us wholly alone, partly through the
usurper cunning which prompted our new tyrant to deal gently with those
who had stood in arms against him, but principally in our case since
the strong tide of invasion had swept northward beyond us, and voewood
slept unharmed, unnoticed among its green solitudes--a saxon homestead
as it had been since hengist's white horse first flaunted upon an
english breeze and the seven kingdoms sprang from the ashes of old
roman britain.

so we lived light-hearted from day to day, forgetting all about the
battle by senlac, and drinking, as i have said, in our evening wassails
confusion and scorn of the invaders who seemed so distant. it was a
good time, and i have little to note of it. many were the big boars
which died upon my eager spear down in the morasses to the southward,
and i came to love my casts of tiercelets and my hounds as though i had
been born to a woodman's cape and had watched the fens for hernshaws
and followed the slot of wounded deers from my youth upward.

all these things led me into many a wild adventure and many a desperate
strait; but one of them stands out from the rest upon the crowded
pages of my memory. i had, one day when editha was with me, mounted
as she would be upon her palfrey, slipped the dogs upon a stag an
arrow of mine had wounded in the foreleg, and, excited by the chase
and reluctant as ever to turn back from an unaccomplished purpose, we
followed far into the unknown distances, and all beyond our reckonings.
i had let fly that shaft at midday, and at sundown the stag was still
afoot, the dogs close behind him, and i, indomitable, muddy, and torn
from head to foot, but with all the hunter instinct hot within me, was
pressing on by my saxon's bridle rein. endless, rough, and tangled
miles had we run and scrambled in that lengthy chase, and neither of us
had noticed the way, or how angry the sun was setting in the west.

thus it came about that when the noble hart at length stood at bay in
the lichened coverts under a bushy crag, there was hardly breath in me
to cheer the weary dogs upon him, and hardly light enough to aim the
swift thrust of my subduing javelin which laid him dead and bleeding
at our feet. yes, and before i could cut a hunter's supper from that
glossy haunch the dome of the sky closed down from east to west, and
the first heavy drops of the evening rain came pattering upon the
leaves overhead. thor! how black it grew as the wind began to whistle
through the branches and the murky clouds to fly across the face of the
somber heaven, while neither east nor west could any limit be seen to
the interminable vastnesses of the endless woodlands! in vain was it we
struggled for a time back upon our footsteps, and then even those were
lost; and, as the sky in the east burned an angry yellow for a moment
before the remorseless night set in, it gave us just light to see we
were hopelessly mazed in the labyrinths of the huge and lonely forest.

it was thus we turned to take such shelter as might offer, and that
gleam shone for a moment pallid, yellow, and ghastly upon a cluster
of gray stones standing on a grassy mound a quarter of a mile away.
thither we struggled through the black mazes of the storm, the headlong
rain whistling through the misty thickets like flights of innumerable
arrows, the angry wind lashing the treetops into bitter complaining,
and waving abroad (in the sodden dismal twilight) all the long beards
of goblin lichens hanging in ghostly tapestry across our path that
dreary october evening.

reeling and plunging to the shelter through a black world of tangled
witnesses, with that mocking gleam behind shining like a window of the
nether world, and overhead a gaunt, hurrying array of cloudy forms, we
were presently upon the coppice outskirt, and there i stopped as though
i had grown to the ground.

i stopped before that great, gaunt amphitheater of gray stones and
stared and stared before me as though i were bereft of sense. i rubbed
my eyes and pointed with trembling, silent finger, and looked again and
again, while the saxon girl crouched to my side, and my hounds whined
and shivered at my feet, for there, incredible! monstrous!--yellow and
shining in the pallid derision of the twilight, stern, hoary, ruinous,
mocking--overthrown and piled one upon another, clasped and knotted
about their feet by the knotted fingers of the woodland growth, swathed
in the rocking mists which gave a horrid life to their cruel, infernal
deadness, were the stones, the very stones of that druid altar-place
upon which i was sacrificed nearly a thousand years before!

here was a pretty welcome! here was a cheerful harborage! what man
ever born of a woman who would not have been dazed and dumfounded
at this sudden confronting--this extraordinary reminiscence of the
long-forgotten? it overwhelmed for the moment even me--me, phra the
phœnician, to whom the red harvest-fields of war are pleasant places,
who have dallied with the infinite, and have been a melancholy
coadjutor of time itself. even me, who never sought to live, yet live
endlessly by my very negligence--who have received from the gods that
gift of existence that others ask for unanswered.

i might have stood there as stolid and grim as any one of those ancient
monoliths all through the storm but for the dear one by my side.
her nestling presence roused me, and, gulping down the last of my
astonishment, and seeing no respite in the yellow eye of the night over
my shoulder, i took the hand that lay in mine with such gentle trust
and, with a strange feeling of awe, led her into the magic circle of
the old religion.

the very altar of my despatch was still there in the center, but
time and forest creatures had worn out from under that mighty slab a
little chamber, roofed with that vast flagstone and sided by its three
supports--a space perhaps no bigger than the cabin of my first trading
felucca, yet into this we crept, with the reluctant hounds behind us,
while the tempest thundered round, and, loth to lose us, sought here
and there, piping in strange keys among those time-worn relics of
cruelty, and singing uncouth choruses down every crevice of our wild
retreat.

pleasure and pain are sisters, and the little needs of life must be
fulfilled in every hour. i comforted my comrade, piling for her a rough
couch of the broken litter upon the floor, stuffing up the crannies
as well as might be with damp sods, and then making her a fire. this
latter i effected with some charcoal and burned ends of wood that lay
upon an old shepherd's hearth in the center of the chamber, and we kept
it going with a little store of wood which the same absent wanderer had
gathered in one corner but had failed to use. more; not only did we
mend our circumstances by a ruddy blaze that danced fantastically upon
our rugged walls and set our reeking clothes steaming in its flicker,
but i rolled a stone to the opposite side of the hearth for editha, and
found another for myself, and soon those venison steaks were hissing
most invitingly upon the glowing embers, and filling every nook and
corner of the druid slaughter-place with the suggestive fragrance of
our supper.

manners were rude and ready in that time. we supped as well and
conveniently that night, carving the meat with the little weapons at
our girdles, and eating with our fingers, as though we sat in state at
the high thane's table of distant voewood and looked down the great
rushy hall upon three hundred feeding serfs and bondsmen. and editha
laughed and chattered--secure in my protection--and i echoed her
merriment, while now and then my thoughts would wander, and i heard
again in the tempest's whistling the scream of the hungry kites who
had seen me die, and in the lashing of the branches the clamor and the
beating of the british tribesmen who many a long lifetime before had
shouted around this very place to drown my dying yells.

the good food and the warmth and a long day's work soon brought my
fair mistress's head upon her hand, and presently she was lying upon
the withered leaves in the corner, a fair white flower shut up for the
night-time. so i finished the steak and divided the remnants between
the dogs, and lay back very well contented. but here only commences the
strangest part of that evening!

i had warmed my cross-gartered, buskined saxon legs by the blaze for
the best part of an hour, thinking over all the strange episodes of
my coming to these ancient isles, and seeing again, on the blank
hither wall, this very circle all aglow with the splendid color of
its barbarous purpose, the mighty concourse of the britons set in the
greenery of their reverent oaks--the onset of the romans, the flash and
glitter of their close-packed ranks, and the gallant sempronius--alas!
that so good a youth should be reduced to dust--and thus, i suppose, i
dozed.

and then it seemed all on a sudden a mighty gust of wind swept down
upon the flat roof overhead, shaking even that ponderous stone--those
fierce and brawny hounds of mine howled most fearfully--crouching
behind with bristling hair and shaking limbs--and, looking up,
there--strange, incredible as you will pronounce it--seated beyond
the fire on the stone the saxon had so lately left, drawing her wild,
rain-wet british tresses through her supple fingers--calm, indifferent,
happy--gazing upon me with the gentle wonder i had seen before, was
blodwen, once again herself!

need it be said how wild and wonderful that winsome apparition seemed
in that uncouth place, how the hot flush of wonder burned upon my swart
and weathered cheeks as i sat there and glared through the leaping
flame at that pallid outline? absently she went on with her rhythmical
combing, bewitching me with her unearthly grace and the tender
substance of her immaterial outline, and as i glowered with never a
ready syllable upon my idle tongue, or any emotion but wonder in the
heart beating tumultuously under my hunter tunic, the dogs lay moaning
behind me, and the wild fantastic uproar of the tempest outside forced
through the clefts of our retreat the rain-streaks that sparkled and
hissed in the fire-heap.

that time i did not fear, and presently the princess looked up and
said, in a faint, distant voice, that was like the sound of the breeze
among seashore pine-trees:

"well done, my phœnician! your courage gives me strength." and as she
spoke the words seemed gradually clearer and stronger, until presently
they came sweeter to me than the murmur of a sunny river--gentler than
the whispers of the ripe corn and the south wind.

"shade!" i said. "wonderful, immaterial, immortal, whence came you?"

"whence did i come?" she answered, with the pretty reflection of a
smile upon her face. "out of the storm, o son of anak!--out of the
wild, wet night-wind!"

"and why, and why--to stir me to my inmost soul, and then to leave me?"

"phœnician," she said, "i have not left you since we parted. i have
been the unseen companion of your goings--i have been the shadowless
watcher by your sleep. mine was the unfelt hand that bore your chin up
when you swam with the christian slave-girl--mine was the arm that has
turned, invisibly, a hundred javelins from you--and to-night i am come,
by leave of circumstance, thus to see you."

"i should have thought," i said, becoming now better at my ease, "that
one like you might come or go in scorn of circumstances."

"wherein, my dear master, you argue with more simplicity than
knowledge. there are needs and necessities to the very verge of the
spheres."

but when i questioned what these were, asking the secret of her wayward
visits, she looked at the sleeping editha, and said i could not
understand.

"yes, by wodin's self! but i think i can. yon fair-cheeked girl helps
you. there are a hundred turns and touches in your ways and manners
that speak of her, and show whence you got that borrowed life."

"you are astute, my saxon thane, and i will not utterly refute you."

"then, if you can do this, how was it, blodwen, you never came when i
was roman?"

"in truth, i often tried," she said, with something like a sigh,
"but numidea was not good to fit my subtle needs, and the other one,
electra, was all beyond me." and here that versatile shadow threw
herself into an attitude, and there before me was the roman lady, so
sweet, so enticing, that my heart yearned for her--ah! for the queenly
electra!--all in a moment. but before i could stretch out my arms the
airy form had whisked her ethereal draperies toga-wise across her
breast, and had risen, and there, towering to the low roof, flashing
down scorn and hatred on me, quaking at her feet, shone the very
semblance of electra as i saw her last in the queenly glamour of her
vengeance.

"yes," said blodwen, resuming her own form with perfect calmness before
i, astounded, could catch my breath, and stroking out the tangles of
her long red hair, "there was no doing anything with her, and so,
phœnician, i could not get translated to your material eyes."

all this was very wonderful, yet presently we were chatting as though
there were naught to marvel at. many were the things we spoke of, many
were the wonders that she hinted at, and as she went my curiosity
blazed up apace.

"and, fair princess," i said presently, "turner of javelins, favorer of
mortals, is it then within the power of such as yourself to rule the
destiny of us material ones?"

"not so; else, phœnician, you were not here!"

this made me a little uncomfortable, but, nothing daunted, i looked the
strangest visitor that ever paid a midnight visit full in the face, and
persisted: "tell me, then, you bright reflection of her i loved, how
seems this tinsel show of life upon its over side? is it destiny or man
that is master? how looks the flow of circumstances to you?--to us, you
will remember, it is vague, inexplicable."

"you ask me more than i can say," she answered, "but so far i will
go--you, material, live substantially, and before you lies unchecked
the illimitable spaces of existence. of all these you are certain heir."

"speak on!" i cried, for now and then her voice and attention flagged.
"and is there any rule or sequence in this life of ours--is it for you
to guide or mend our happenings?"

"no, phœnician! you are yourselves the true forgers of the chains that
bind you, and that initial 'prenticeship you serve there on your world
is ruled by the aggregate of your actions. i tell you, tyrian," she
exclaimed, with something as much like warmth as could come from such
a hazy air-stirred body--"i tell you nothing was ever said or done but
was quite immortal; all your little goings and comings, all your deeds
and misdeeds, all the myriad leaves of spoken things that have ever
come upon the forests of speech, all the rain-drops of action that have
gone to make the boundless ocean of human history, are on record. you
shake your head, and cannot understand? perhaps i should not wonder at
it."

"and have all these things left a record upon the great books of life,
and is it given to the beings of the air to refer to them, even as
yonder hermit finds secreted on his yellow vellums the things of long
ago?"

"it is so in some kind. the actions of that life of yours leave
spirit-prints behind them from the most infinitesimal to the largest.
now, see! i have but to wish, and there again is all the moving
pantomime around you of that unhappy day when you well-nigh died upon
this spot," and the chieftainess leaped to her feet and swept her arm
around and looked into the void and smiled and nodded as though all the
wild spectacle she spoke of were enacting under her very eyes. "surely,
you see it! look at the priests and the people, and there the running
foreigners and that tall youth at their head--why, o trader in oils and
dyes! it is not the remembrance of the thing, it is, i swear it, the
thing itself"

but never a line or color could i perceive, only the curling smoke
overhead looped and hung like tapestries upon the gray lichened walls,
and the black night-time through the crevices. and, discovering this,
blodwen suddenly stopped and looked upon me with vexed compassion. "i
am sorry, i am no good teacher to so outrun my pupil. ask me henceforth
what simple questions you will, and they shall be answered to the best
i can."

and so presently i went on: "if those things which have been are thus
to you--and it does not seem impossible--how is it with those other
things of to-day, or still unborn of the future? how far can you more
favored ones foresee or guide those things to which we, unhappy, but
submit?"

"the strong tide of circumstance, phœnician, is not to be turned by
such hands as these"--and she held her pallid wrists toward the blaze,
until i saw the ruddy gleam flash back from the rough gold bosses of
her ancient bracelets. "there are laws outside your comprehension which
are not framed for your narrow understanding. we obey these as much
as you, but we perceive with infinitely clearer vision the inevitable
logic of fate, the true sequence of events, and thus it is sometimes
within our power to amend and guide the details of that brief episode
which you call your life."

"do you say that priceless span, my comrades, yonder sleeping girl, and
all the others set so high a value on is but ‘an episode'?"

"yes--a halting step upon a wondrous journey, half a gradation upon the
mighty spirals of existence!"

"and time?" i asked, full of a wonder that scarce found leisure to
comprehend one word of hers before it asked another question. "is there
time with you? even i, reflective now and then upon this long journey
of mine, have thought that time must be a myth, an impossibility to
larger experience."

"of what do you speak, my merchant? i do not remember the word."

"oh, yes; but you must. is there period and change yonder? is
time--time, the great braggart and bully of life, also potent with you?"

"ah! now i do recall your meaning; but, my tyrian, we left our
hour-glasses and our calendars behind us when we came away! there is,
perhaps, time yonder to some extent, but no mortal eyes, not mine even,
can tell the teaching of that prodigious dial that records the hours of
universes and of spaces."

i bent my head and thought, for i dimly perceived in all this a meaning
appearing through its incomprehensibleness. much else did we talk
through the live-long night, whereof all i may not tell, and something
might but weary you. at one time i asked her of the little one i had
never seen, and then she, reflective, questioned whether i would wish
to see him. "as gladly," was my reply, "as one looks for the sun in
springtime." at this the comely chieftainess seemed to fall a-musing,
and even while she did so an eddy in the curling smoke of the low red
fire swung gently into consistency there by her bare shoulder, and
brightened and grew into mortal likeness, and in a moment, by the
summons of his mother's will, from where i knew not, and how i could
not guess, a fair, young, ruddy boy was fashioned and stood there
leaning upon the gentle breast that had so often rocked him, and gazing
upon me with a quiet wonder that seemed to say, "how came you here?"
but the little one had not the substance of the other, and after a
moment, during which i felt somehow that no slight effort was being
made to maintain him, he paled, and then the same waft of air that had
conspired to his creation shredded him out again into the fine thin
webs of disappearing haze.

comely shadow! dear british mistress! great was thy condescension,
passing strange thy conversation, wonderful thy knowledge, perplexing,
mysterious thy professed ignorance! and then, when the morning was
nigh, she bade me speak a word of comfort to the restless-sleeping
editha, and when i had done so i turned again--and the cave was empty!
i ran out into the open air and whispered "blodwen!" and then louder
"blodwen!" and all those gray, uncouth, sinful old monoliths, standing
there in the half-light up to their waists in white mist, took up
my word and muttered out of their time-worn hollows one to another,
"blodwen, blodwen!" but never again for many a long year did she answer
to that call.

chapter vii

in the days that followed, it seemed the cruse of contentment would
never run dry, and i, foolish i, thought angry destiny had misled me,
and that these green saxon glades were to witness the final ending of
my story. vain hope! illusive expectation! the hand of fate was even
then raised to strike!

in that pleasant harborage, outside the ken of ambition, and beyond the
limits of avarice, surrounded by almost impenetrable mazes of forest
land, life was delightful indeed. the sun shone yellow and big in those
early days upon our oak-crowned hillocks--sometimes i doubt if it is
ever so warm and ruddy now--and december storms told mightily in praise
of the great yule fires wherewith we defied the winter cold. in the
summer time, when the sunny saxon orchards sheltered the herds of kine
in their flickering shadows, and the great droves of black swine lay
a-basking among the ferns on the distant hangers, we lived more out of
doors than in. editha then would bring out under the oaks the little
ruddy-cheeked gurth, and set him upon my knee, that i might cut him
reed whistles or bows and arrows, while the flaxen-haired agitha played
about her mother, tuning her pretty prattle to the merry clatter of the
distaff and the wheel.

in the winter the blaze that went leaping and crackling from our
hearthstone shone golden upon the hair of those little ones as they
sat wide-eyed by me, and saw among the ruddy embers the white horse of
hengist and the banner of his brother winning these fertile vales for
a noble saxon realm. never was there a better saxon than i! and when
i told of harold, and softened to those tender ears the story of his
dying, the bright drops of sympathy stood in my small maiden's eyes,
while gurth's flashed hatred of the false norman and scorn of foreign
tyrants. under such circumstances it will readily be understood that
i ought to have had little wish to draw weapons again or bestride the
good charger growing so gross and sleek in his stall all this long
peace time.

and yet the silken meshes of felicity were irksome against all reason,
and i would grow weary of so much good fortune, finding my pretty
deckings and raiment heavier--more burdensome wear--than ever was
martial harness. my fair saxon wife noticed these moods, and strove
to mend them. she would take me out to the hawking, were i never so
gloomy, and then i would envy the wild haggards of the rocks who got
their living from day to day in the free mid air, and asked no favor
of either gods or men. or, perhaps, she would make revelries upon the
level green before her homestead, and thither would come all the fools
and pedlers, all the bear-baiters, somersaulters, and wrestlers of the
shire. but i was not to be pleasured so, and i slew the bear in single
combat, and tossed, vindictive, the somersaulters over the hucksters'
stalls, and broke the ribs in the wrestlers' sides--till none would
play with me, and all of the people murmured. then, of a night, editha
got the best gleemen in mercia to sing to me, and when they sang of
peace, and sheep and orchards, or each praised his leman's moonlike
eyes and slender middies, i would not listen. nor was it better when
they tuned their strings to martial ditties, for that doubled my
malady, since then their rhyming stirred my soul to new unrest, making
worse that which they sought to cure.

i sometimes think it was all this to-do which brought voewood under
norman notice. but, perhaps, it was the slow and steady advance of the
invaders' power percolating like a rising tide into all the recesses
of the land which drew us into the fatal circle of the despoilers, and
not my waywardness. be this as it may, the result was the same.

over to the northward, a score of miles away, where the great road
ran east, we heard from wandering strollers the normans were passing
daily. then, later, there came in the news-budget of a flemish pedler
tidings that the hungry foreigners had licked up all the fat meadows
around the nearest town, had hung its aldermen over the walls, and
built a tower and dungeon (after their wont) in the middle of it. yes!
and these messengers of ill omen said there were left no men of note
or saxon blood to uphold the english cause--there was no proper speech
in england but the norman--there was no way of wearing a tunic but
the norman--nothing now to swear by but by our lady of tours and holy
st. bridget--all saxon wives were in danger of kissing--and all saxon
abbots were become barefooted monks!

never was a country turned inside out so soon or quietly; and as i
looked over our wide, fair meadows, and upon my sweet girl and her
flaxen little ones, and thought how already for her i had risked my
life, i could not help wondering how soon i might have to venture it
again.

on apace came the outer conquest into our inner peace. towns and burghs
went down, and the hungry flames of lust and avarice fed upon what they
destroyed. all the vales and hills the swords of hengist and horsa
had won, and baptized with foemen's blood, in the mighty names of old
norsemen and valhalla, were being christened anew to suit a mincing,
latter tongue. thane and franklin uncapped them at the roadside to
these steel-bound swarms of ruthless spoilers, and nothing was sacred,
neither deed nor covenant, neither having nor holding, which ran
counter to the wishes of the western scourges of our english weakness.

when i thought of all this i was extraordinarily ill at ease, and,
before i could settle upon how best to meet the danger, it came upon
us, and we were overwhelmed. briefly, it was thus: about twelve years
after the battle where harold had died, the norman leader had, we
heard, taken it into his head to poll us like cattle, to find the sum
and total of our feus and lands, our serfs and orchards, and even of
our very selves! now, few of us saxons but felt this was a certain
scheme to tax and oppress us even more severely than the people had
been oppressed in the time of st. dunstan. besides this, our free
spirits rose in scorn of being counted and weighed and mulcted by
plebeian emissaries of the usurper, so we murmured loud and long.

and those thanes who complained the bitterest were hanged by the
derisive normans on their own kitchen beams--on the very same hooks
where they cured their mighty sides of pork--while those who complied
but falsely with the assessor's commands were robbed of wife and
heritage, children and lands, and shackled with the brass collar of
serfdom, or turned out to beg their living on the wayside and sue the
charity of their own dependants. whether we would thus be hanged or
outcast, or whether we would humble us to this hateful need, writing
ourselves and our serfs down in the great "doom's day" book, all had to
choose.

for my own part, after much debating, and for the sake of those who
looked to me, i had determined to do what was required--and then, if
it might be, to bring all the saxon gentlemen together--to raise these
english shires upon the normans, and with fire and sword revoke our
abominable indenture of thraldom. but, alas! my hasty temper and my
inability to stomach an affront in any guise undid my good resolutions.

well, this mighty book was being compiled far and wide, we heard,
in every shire: there were some men of good standing base enough to
countenance it, and, taking the name of the king's justiciaries, they
got together shorn monks--shaveling rascals who did the writing and
computing--with reeves hungry for their masters' woodlands, and many
other lean forsworn villains. this jury of miscreants went round from
hall to hall, from manor to manor, with their scrips and pens and
parchment, until all the land was being gathered into the avaricious
norman's tax roll.

they cast their greedy eyes at last on sunny, sleepy voewood, though,
indeed, i had implored every deity, old or new, i could recall that
they might overlook it; and one day their hireling train of two score
pikemen came ambling down the glades with a fat abbot--a norman
rascal--at their head, and pulled up at our doorway.

"hullo!" says the monk. "whose house is this?"

"mine," i said gruffly, with a secret fancy that there would be some
heads broken before the census was completed.

"and who are you?"

"the master of voewood."

"what else?"

"nothing else!"

"well, you are not over-civil, anyhow, my saxon churl," said the man of
scrolls and goose-quills.

"frankly," i answered, "sir monk, the smaller civility you look for
from me to-day the less likely you are to be disappointed. out with
that infernal catechism of yours, and have done, and move your black
shadows from my porch."

at this the clerk shrugged his shoulders--no doubt he did not look to
be a very welcome guest--and coughed and spit, and then unfurled in
our free sunshine a great roll of questions, and forthwith proceeded to
expound them in bastard latin, smacking of moldy cathedral cells and
cloister pedantry.

"now, mark me, sir voewood, and afterward answer truly in everything.
here, first, i will read you the declaration of your neighbor, the
worthy thane sewin, in order that you may see how the matter should
go, and then afterward i will question you yourself," and, taking
a parchment from a junior, he began: "here is what sewin told us:
_rex tenet in dominio sohurst; de firma regis edwardi fuit. tunc se
defendebat pro 17 hidis; nihil geldaverunt. terra est 16 carucatæ;
in dominio sunt 2æ carucatæ, et 24 villani, et 10 bordarij cum 20
carucis. ibi ecclesia quam willelmus tenet de rege cum dimidia hida in
elemosina, silva 40 porcorum et ipsa est in parco regis_"

but hardly had my friend got so far as this in displaying the
domesticity of sewin the thane, when there broke a loud uproar from
the rear of voewood, and the tripping latin came to a sudden halt as
there emerged in sight a rabble of saxon peasants and norman prickers
freely exchanging buffets. in the midst of them was our bailiff, a
very stalwart fellow, hauling along and beating as he came a luckless
soldier in the foreign garb just then so detestable to our eyes.

"why," i said, "what may all this be about? what has the fellow done,
sven, that your saxon cudgel makes such friends with his norman cape?"

"what? why, the graceless yonker, not content with bursting open the
buttery door and setting all these scullion men-at-arms drinking my
lady's ale and rioting among her stores, must needs harry the maidens,
scaring them out of their wits, and putting the whole place in an
uproar! as i am an honest man, there has been more good ale spilled
this half-hour, more pottery broken, more linen torn, more roasts
upset, more maids set screaming, than since the danes last came round
this way and pillaged us from roof to cellar!"

"why, you fat saxon porker!" cried the leader of the troops, pushing to
the front, "what are you good for but for pillage? drunken serf! and
were it not for the politic heart of yonder king, i and mine would make
you and yours sigh again for your danish ravishers, looking back from
our mastery to their red fury with sickly longing! out on you! unhand
the youth, or by st. bridget, there will be a fat carcass for your
crows to peck at!" and he put his hand upon his dagger.

thereon i stepped between them, and, touching my jeweled belt, said:
"fair sir, i think the youth has had no less than his deserts, and as
for the voewood crows they like norman carrion even better than saxon
flesh."

the soldier frowned, as well as he might, at my retort, but before we
could draw, as assuredly we would have done, the monk pushed in between
us, and the athelings of the commission, who had orders to carry out
their work with peace and despatch as long as that were possible,
quieted their unruly rabble, and presently a muttering, surly order was
restored between the glowering crowds.

"now," said the scribe propitiatingly, anxious to get through with
his task, "you have heard how amiably sewin answered. of you i will
ask a question or two in saxon, since, likely enough, you do not know
the blessed latin." (by the soul of hengist, though, i knew it before
the stones of that confessor's ancient monastery were hewn from their
native rock!) "answer truly, and all shall be well with you. first,
then, how much land hast thou?"

but i could not stand it. my spleen was roused against these braggart
bullies, and, throwing discretion to the wind, i burst out, "just so
much as serves to keep me and mine in summer and winter!"

"and how many plows?"

"so many as need to till our cornlands."

"rude boar!" said the monk, backing off into the group of his friends,
and frowning from that vantage in his turn. "how many serfs acknowledge
your surly leadership?"

"just so many," i said, boiling over, "as can work the plows and reap
the corn, and keep the land from greedy foreign clutches! there, put up
your scroll and begone. i will not answer you! i will not say how many
pigeons there are in our dovecotes--how many fowls roost upon their
perches--how many earthen pots we have, or how many maids to scrub
them! get you back to the conqueror: tell him i deride and laugh at him
for the second time. say i have lived a longish life, and never yet saw
the light of that day when i profited by humility. say i, the swart
stranger who stabbed his ruffian courtier and galloped away with the
white maid, editha of voewood--i, who plucked that flower from the very
saddle-bow of his favorite, and thundered derisive through his first
camp there on the eastern downs--say, even i will find a way to keep
and wear her, in scorn of all that he can do! out with you--begone!"

and they went, for i was clearly in no mood to be dallied with, while
behind me the serfs and vassals were now mustering strongly, an
angry array armed with such weapons as they could snatch up in their
haste, and wanting but a word or look to fall upon the little band of
assessors and slay them as they stood. thus we won that hour--and many
a long day had we to regret the victory.

my luck was against me that time. i hoped, so far as there was any
hope or reason in my thoughtless anger, to have had a space to rouse
the neighboring thanes and their vassals upon these our tyrants,
and i had dreamed, so combustible was the country just then, somehow
perhaps the flame would have spread far and wide. i saw that abominable
thing, rebellion, for once linked hand in hand with her sweet rival,
patriotism, i saw the red flames of vengeance in the quarrel i had
made my own sweeping through the land and lapping up with its hundred
tongues every evidence of the spoilers! yes! and even i had fancied
that, as there were no true saxon princes for our english throne, there
was still editha, my wife; and if there were no swords left to fence a
throne so filled, yet there was the sword of phra the phœnician! vain
fantasy! the faces of the fates were averted.

those hateful inquisitors had not gone many hours' journey northward,
when, as ill-luck would have it, they fell in with a norman captain,
godfrey de boville, and two hundred men-at-arms, marching to garrison
a western city. to these they told their tale, and, ever ready for
pillage and bloodshed, the band halted, and then turned into the
woodlands where we had our lair.

the sun was low that afternoon when an affrighted herdsman came running
in to me with the news that he knew not how many soldiers were in the
glades beyond. and before he could get his breath or quite tell his
hasty message their prickers came out of the wood--the gallant norman
array (whose glitter has since grown dearer to me than the shine of
a mistress' eyes) rode from under our oak-trees, the banners and
bannerets fluttered upon the evening wind--their trumpets brayed until
our very rafters echoed to that warlike sound--the level twilight rays
flashed back from those serried ranks and the steel panoply of the
warriors in as goodly a martial show as ever, to that day, i had seen.

what need i tell you of the negotiations which followed while this
silver cloud, charged with ruin and cruelty, hung on the dusky velvet
side of the twilight hill above us? what need be said of how i swore
between my teeth at the chance which had brought this swarm hither in
a day rather than in the week i had hoped for, or how my heart burned
with smothered anger and pride when we had to tamely answer their
haughty summons to unconditional surrender?

yet by one saving clause they did not attack us at once. only to me was
it clear how utterly impossible was it with the few rugged serfs at
my command to defend even for one single onset that great straggling
house against their overwhelming force. to them our strength was quite
unknown; this and the gathering darkness tempted the norman to put
off the attack until the daylight came again, and the respite was our
saving. it was not a saving upon which to dwell long, for 'twas no more
glorious than the retreat of a wolf from his hiding-place when the
shepherds fire the brake behind him.

all along the edge of the hill their watch-fires presently twinkled
out, and as editha and sven the strong came to me in gloomy conference
upon the turret we could see the soldiers pass now and again before
the blaze, we could hear their laughter and the snatches of their
drinking-song, the hoarse cry of the wardens, and the champing and
whinny of the chargers picketed under the starlight in lines upon our
free saxon turf. and for sven and all his good comrade hinds we knew
to-morrow would bring the riveting of new and heavier collars than any
they had worn as yet. for me and my contumacy, though i feared it not,
there could be naught but the swift absolution of a norman sword; while
for her--for her, that gentle, stately lady to whose pale sweetness
my rough, unworthy pen can do no sort of justice--there was nameless
degradation and half a wandering bully's tent.

the serf suggested, with his rugged northern valor, we should set light
to the hall and, with the women and children in our midst, sally out
and cut a way to freedom, and i knew the path he would choose would
have been through the hostile camp. but his lady suggested better. she
proposed both hind and bondsmen should steal away in the darkness,
and, since valor here was hopeless, disperse over the countryside, and
there, secure in their humbleness, await our future returning. we, on
the other hand, would follow them through the friendly shadows that
lay deep and nigh to the house on the unguarded side, and then turn us
to a monastery some few miles away, where, if we could reach it, in
sanctuary and the care of one of the few remaining saxon abbots, we
might bide our chance, or at least make terms with our conquerors.

so it was settled, and soon i had all those kind, shaggy villains
in the dining-hall standing there uncapped upon the rushes in the
torchlight, and listening in melancholy silence to the plan, and then
presently, with the despatch our situation needed, they were slipping
in twos and threes out of the little rearward portal and slinking off
to the thickets.

presently our turn came, and as i stood gloomy and stern in that
voiceless, empty hall that was wont to be so bright and noisy,
fingering my itching dagger and scowling out of the lattice upon the
red gleam in the night air hanging over the norman camp-fires, there
came the fall of my wife's feet upon the stairway. in either hand she
had a babe, swaddled close up against the night air, and naught but
their bright wonder-brimming eyes showing as she hugged them tight
against her sides. for them, for them alone, the frown gave way, and i
stooped to that escape. we crept away, and editha's heart was torn at
leaving thus the hall where she had been born and reared, and when,
presently, in the shadows of the crowded oaks, she found all her slaves
and bondsmen in a knot to wish her farewell, the tears that had been
brooding long overflowed unrestrainedly.

even i, who had dwelt among them but a space on my way from the further
world of history toward the unknown future, could not but be moved by
their uncouth love and loyalty. there were men there who had stood in
arms with her father when the cruel danes had ravished these valleys
for a score of miles inland, and some who had grown with her in the
goodly love and faith of thane and servitor as long as she herself
had lived. these rugged fellows wept like children, called me father,
_klafod_, "bread bestower," and pressed upon her in silent sorrow,
kissing her hands and the hem of her robe, and taking the little ones
from her arms, and pressing their rude unshaven faces to their rosebud
cheeks until i feared that gurth or agitha might cry out, or some wail
from that secret scene of sorrow would catch the ears of our watchful
foemen.

so, as gently as might be, i parted the weeping mistress and her
bondsmen, and set her upon a good horse sven had stolen from the
paddock, and springing into the saddle of my own strong charger, gave
my broad jeweled belt to the saxon that he might divide it among his
comrades, and, taking a long tough spear from his faithful hand, turned
northward with editha upon our dangerous journey.

*       *       *       *       *

we stole along as quietly as might be for some distance in safety,
riding where the moss was deepest and the shadows thick, and then, just
when we were at the nearest to the norman camp in the curve we were
making toward the monastery beyond, those ill-conditioned invaders set
up their evening trumpet-call. as the shrill notes came down into the
dim starlight glade, strong, clear, and martial in the evening quiet,
they thrilled that gallant old charger i had borrowed from the camp at
hastings down to his inmost warlike fiber. he recognized the familiar
sound--mayhap it was the very trumpet-call which had been fodder and
stable to him for years--and, with ears pricked forward and feet that
beat the dewy turf in union to his pleasure, he whinnied loud and long!

nothing it availed me to smite my hand upon my breast at this deadly
betrayal, or lay a warning finger upon his brave, unwitting, velvet
nozzle--luckless, accursed horse, the mischief was done! but yet, i
will not abuse him, for the grass grows green over his strong sleek
limbs, and right well that night he amended his error! hardly had his
neigh gone into the stillness when the chargers in the camp answered
it, and in a moment the men-at-arms and squires by the nearest fire
were all on foot, and in another they had espied us and set up a shout
that woke the ready camp in a moment.

there was small time to think. i clapped my hand upon editha's bridle
rein and gave my own a shake, and away we went across the checkered
moonlight glade. but so close had we been that a bow-string or two
hummed in the norman tents, and before we were fairly started i heard
the rustle of the shafts in the leaves overhead. it was more than
arrows we had to dread, and, turning my head for a moment ere we
plunged again into dark vistas of the forest road, there, sure enough,
was the pursuit streaming out after us, and gallant squires and knights
tumbling into their saddles and shouting and cheering as they came
galloping and glittering down behind us--a very pretty show, but a
dangerous one.

by the souls of st. dunstan and his forty monks! but i could have
enjoyed that midnight ride had it not been for the pale, brave rider
at my side, and the little ones that lay fearfully a-nestling on our
saddle-bows. for hours the swift, keen gallop of our horses swallowed
the unseen ground in tireless rhythm--all through the night field and
coppice and hanger swept by us as we passed from glade to glade and
woodland to woodland--now 'twas a lonely forester's hut that shone
for a moment in ghostly whiteness between the tree-stems with the
nightshine on its lifeless face, and anon we sped through droves of
saxon swine, sleeping upon the roadway under their oak-trees, round
a muffled swineherd. and the great forest stags stayed the fraying
of their antlers against the tree-trunks in the dark coppices as we
flew by, and the startled wolf yelped and snarled upon our path as
our fleeting shadows overtook him; and then, there, ever behind, low,
remorseless, stern, came the murmuring hoofbeats of our pursuers, now
rising and now falling upon the light breath of the night-wind, but
ever, as our panting steeds strode shorter and shorter, coming nearer
and nearer, clearer and clearer.

had this somber race, whereof death held the stakes, continued so as
it began, straight on end, i do not think we could have got away. but
when we had ridden many an hour, and the heavy streaks of white foam
were marking editha's horse with dreadful suggestion, and his breath
was coming hot and husky through his wide red nostrils, for a moment or
two the sound of the pursuers stopped. blessed respite. they had missed
the woodland road--but for all too short a space. we had hardly made
good four or five hundred yards of advantage when, terribly near to
us, sounded the call of one of their horsemen, and soon all the others
were in his footsteps again. this one, he who now led the pursuers by,
perhaps, a quarter of a mile, gained on us stride by stride, until i
could stand the thud of his horsehoofs on the turf behind no more.
"here!" i said fiercely to editha, "take gurth," and put him with his
sister in her arms, then, bidding them ride slowly forward, turned my
good charger and paced him slowly back toward the oncoming knight, with
stern anger smoldering in my heart.

there was a smooth, wide bit of grassy road between us in that center,
midnight saxon forest. and never a gleam of light fell upon that
ancient thoroughfare; never the faintest, thin white finger of a star
pierced the black canopy of boughs overhead; it was as black as the
kennel of cerberus, and as i sat my panting war-horse i could not see
my own hand stretched out before me--yet there, in that grim blackness,
i met the norman lance to lance, and sent his spirit whirling into the
outer space!

i let him come within two hundred yards, then suddenly rose in my
stirrups and, shouting harold's war-cry, since i did not deign to fall
upon him unawares, "out! out! england! england!" awaited his answer. it
came in a moment, strange and inhuman in the black stillness, "rou! ha
rou! notre dame!" and then--muttering between my tight-set teeth that
surely that road was the road to hell for one of us--i bent my head
down almost to my horse's ears, drove the spurs into him, and, gripping
my long, keen spear, thundered back upon my unseen foeman. with a shock
that startled the browsing hinds a mile away, we were together. the
norman spear broke into splinters athwart my body--but mine, more truly
held, struck him fair and full--i felt him like a great dead weight
upon it, i felt his saddle-girths burst and fly, and then, as my own
strong haft bent like a willow wand and snapped close by my hand, that
midnight rider and his visionary steed went crashing to the ground.
bitterly i laughed as i turned my horse northward once more, and from
a black cavern-mouth on the hillside an owl echoed my grim merriment
with ghastly glee.

well, the night was all but done, yet were we not out of the toils. a
little further on, editha's floundering steed gave out, and, just as we
saw the pale turrets of the monastery shining in the open a mile ahead
of us, the horse rolled over dead upon the grass and bracken.

"quick, quick!" i said, "daughter of hardicanute," and the good saxon
girl had passed the little ones to the pommel and put her own foot
upon my toe and sprang on to my saddle crupper sooner than it takes to
tell. ah! and the nearer we came to our goal the closer seemed to be
the throb and beat of the pursuing hoofs behind. and many an anxious
time did i turn my head to watch the rogues closing with us, now ever
and anon in sight, and many a word of encouragement did i whisper to
the gallant charger whose tireless courage was standing us in such good
case.

noble beast! right well had he atoned his mistake that evening, and in
a few minutes more we left the greenwood, and now he swept us over the
abbot's fat meadows, where the white morning mist was lying ghostly
in wreaths and wisps upon the tall wet grass, and then we staggered
into the foss and spurned the short turf, and so past the checkered
cloisters, and pulled up finally at a low postern door i had espied as
we approached the nearest wall of the noble saxon monastery. surely
never was a traveler in such a hurry to be admitted as i, and i beat
upon that iron-studded door with the knob of my dagger in a way which
must have been heard in every cell of that sacred pile.

"my friend," said a reverend head which soon appeared at a little
window above, "is this not unseemly haste at such an hour, and my lord
abbot not yet risen to matins?"

"for the love of heaven, father," i said, "come down and let us in!"
for by this time the normans were not a bowshot away, and it still
looked as if we might fall into their hands.

"why," said the unwotting monk, "no doubt the hospitality of st. olaf's
walls was never refused to weary strangers, but you must go round to
the lodge and rouse the porter there--truly he sleeps a little heavy,
but no doubt he will admit you eventually."

"sir priest," i shouted in my rage and fear as the good old fellow
went meandering on, "our need is past all nicety of etiquette! here is
editha of voewood, the niece of your holy abbot himself, and yonder are
they who would harry and take her. come down, come down, or by the holy
rood our blood will forever stain your ungenerous lintel!"

by this time the horsemen were breasting the smooth green glacis that
led up to the monastery walls--half a dozen of them had outlived that
wild race--the reins were upon their smoking chargers' necks, their
reeking spurs red and ruddy with their haste, the spattered clay
and loam of many a woodland rivulet checkering their horses to the
shoulders, and each rider as he came shouting and clapping his hands
upon the foam-speckled neck of these panting steeds that strained with
thundering feet to the last hundred yards of green sward and the prize
beyond.

nearer and nearer they came, and my fair, tall saxon wife put down her
little ones by the opening of the door and covered them with her skirt
as she turned her pale, white, tearless face to the primrose flush of
the morning. and i--with bitterness and despair in my heart--unsheathed
my saxon sword and cast the scabbard fiercely to the ground, and stood
out before them--my bare and heaving breast a fair target for those
glittering oncoming norman lances!

and then--just when that game was all but lost--there came the sweet
patter of sandaled feet within, bolt by bolt was drawn back; willing
hands were stretched out; the mother and her babes were dragged from
the steps--even my charger was swallowed by the friendly shelter, and
i myself was pulled back lastly--the postern slammed to, and, as the
great locks turned again, and the iron bars fell into their stony
sockets, we heard the norman chargers' hoofs ringing on the flagstones,
and the angry spear-heads rattling on the outer studs of that friendly
oaken doorway.

*       *       *       *       *

thus was the gentle franklin saved; but little did i think in saving
her how long i was to lose her. i had but stabled my noble beast
down by the abbot's own palfrey, and fed and watered him with loving
gratitude, and then had gone to editha and my own supper (waited on by
many a wondering, kindly one of these corded, russet brothers), when
that strange fate of mine overtook me once again. i know not how it
was, but all on a sudden the world melted away into a shadowy fantasy,
my head sank upon the supper-board, and there--between the goodly abbot
and the fair saxon lady--i fell into a pleasant, dreamless sleep.

chapter viii

it was with indescribable sensations of mingled pain and satisfaction
that life dawned again in my mind and body after the drowsy ending
of the last chapter. to me the process was robbed of wonder--no idea
crossed my mind but that i had slept an ordinary sleep; but to you,
knowing the strange fate to which i am liable, will at once occur
suspicion and expectation. both these feelings will be gratified, yet
i must tell my story, in my simple fashion, as it occurred.

this time, then, wakefulness came upon me in a prolonged gray
and crimson vision; and for a long spell--now i think of it
closely--probably for days, i was wrestling to unravel a strange web of
light and gloom, in which all sorts of dreamy colors shone alternate in
a misty blending upon the blank field of my mind. these colors were now
and again swallowed up by an episode of deep obscurity, and the longer
i studied them in an unwitting, listless way the more pronounced and
definite they became, until at last they were no more a tinted haze of
uncertain tone, but a checkered plan, silently passing over my shut
eyelids at slow, measured intervals. well, upon an afternoon--which,
you will understand, i shall not readily forget--my eyes were suddenly
opened, and, with a deep sigh, like one who wakes after a good night's
repose, existence came back upon me, and, all motionless and dull, but
very consciously alive and observant, i was myself again.

my first clear knowledge on that strange occasion was of the strains of
a merle singing somewhere near; and, as those seraphic notes thrilled
into the dry, unused channels of my hearing, the melody went through me
to my utmost fiber. next i felt, as a strong tonic elixir, a draught
of cool spring air, full of the taste of sunshine and rich with the
scent of a grateful earth, blowing down upon me and dissipating, with
its sweet breath, the last mists of my sleepfulness. while these soft
ministrations of the good nurse nature put my blood into circulation
again, filling me with a gentle vegetable pleasure, my newly opened
eyes were astounded at the richness and variety of their early
discoverings.

to the inexperience of my long forgetfulness everything around was
quaint and grotesque! everything, too, was gray, and crimson, and
green. as i stared and speculated, with the vapid artlessness of a
baby novice, the new world into which i was thus born slowly took
form and shape. it opened out into unknown depths, into aisles and
corridors, into a wooden firmament overhead, checkered with clouds of
timber-work and endless mazes (to my poor untutored mind) of groins
and buttresses. long gray walls--the same that had been the groundwork
of my fancy--opened on either side, a great bare sweep of pavement was
below them, and a hundred windows letting in the comely daylight above,
but best of all was that long one by me which the crimson sun smote
strongly upon its varied surface, and, gleaming through the gorgeous
patchwork of a dozen parables in colored glasses, fell on the ground
below in pools of many-colored brightness. as i, inertly, watched these
shifting beams, i perceived in them the cause of those gay mosaics with
which the outer light had amused my sleeping fancies!

all these things in time appeared distinct enough to me, and tempted a
trial of whether my physical condition equaled the apparent soundness
of my senses. i had hardly had leisure as yet to wonder how i had
come into this strange position, or to remember--so strong were the
demands of surrounding circumstances on my attention--the last remote
pages of my adventures--remote, i now began to entertain a certain
consciousness, they were--i was so fully taken up with the matter of
the moment, that it never occurred to me to speculate beyond, but the
pressing question was in what sort of a body were those sparks of sight
and sense burning.

it was pretty clear i was in a church, and a greater one than i had
ever entered before. my position, i could tell, spoke of funeral
rites, or rather the stiff comfort of one of those marble effigies
with which sculptors have from the earliest times decorated tombs.
and yet i was not entombed, nor did i think i was marble, or even the
plaster of more frugal monumenters. my eyes served little purpose
in the deepening light, while as yet i had not moved a muscle. as i
thought and speculated, the dreadful fancy came across me that, if i
were not stone, possibly i was the other extreme--a thin tissue of dry
dust held together by the leniency of long silence and repose, and
perhaps--dreadful consideration!--the sensations of life and pleasure
now felt were threading those thin wasted tissues, as i have seen the
red sparks reluctantly wander in the black folds of a charred scroll,
and finally drop out one by one for pure lack of fuel. was i such a
scroll? the idea was not to be borne, and, pitting my will against the
stiffness of i knew not what interval, i slowly lifted my right arm and
held it forth at length.

my chief sentiment at the moment was wonderment at the limb thus held
out in the dim cathedral twilight, my next was a glow of triumph at
this achievement, and then, as something of the stress of my will was
taken off and the arm flew back with a jerk to its exact place by my
side, a flood of pain rushed into it, and with the pain came slowly
at first, but quickly deepening and broadening, a remembrance of my
previous sleeps and those other awakenings of mine attended by just
such thrills.

i will not weary you with repetitions or recount the throes that
i endured in attaining flexibility. i have, by heaven's mercy, a
determination within me of which no one is fit to speak but he who
knows the extent and number of its conquests. a dozen times, so keen
were these griefs, i was tempted to relinquish the struggle, and as
many times i triumphed, the unquenched fire of my mind but burning the
brighter for each opposition.

at last, when the painted shadows had crept up the opposite wall inch
by inch and lost themselves in the upper colonnades, and the gloom
around me had deepened into blackness, i was victorious, and weak, and
faint, and tingling; but, respirited and supple, i lay back and slept
like a child.

the rest did me good. when i opened my eyes again it was with no
special surprise (for the capacity of wonder is very volatile) that
i saw the chancel where i lay had been lighted up, and that a portly
abbot was standing near, clad in brown fustian, corded round his ample
middle, and picking his teeth with a little splinter of wood as he
paced up and down muttering to himself something, of which i only
caught such occasional fragments as "fat capons," "spoiled roasts"
(with a sniff in the direction of the side door of the abbey), and a
malison on "unseemly hours" (with a glance at an empty confessional
near me), until he presently halted opposite--whereon i immediately
shut my eyes--and regarded me with dull complacency.

as he did so an acolyte, a pale, grave recluse on whose face vigils
and abnegation had already set the lines of age, stepped out from the
shadow, and, standing just behind his superior, also gazed upon me with
silent attention.

"that blessed saint, ambrose," said the fat abbot, pointing at me with
his toothpick, apparently for want of something better to speak about,
"is nearly as good to us as the miraculous cruse was to the woman of
sarepta: what this holy foundation would do just now, when all men's
minds are turned to war, without the pence we draw from pilgrims who
come to kneel to him, i cannot think!"

"indeed, sir," said the sad-eyed youth, "the good influence of that
holy man knows no limit: it is as strong in death as no doubt it was
in life. 'twas only this morning that by leave of our prior i brought
out the great missals, and there found something, but not much, that
concerned him."

"recite it, brother," quoth the abbot with a yawn, "and if you know
anything of him beyond the pilgrim pence he draws you know more than i
do."

"nay, my lord, 'tis but little i learned. all the entries save the
first in our journals are of slight value, for they but record from
year to year how this sum and that were spent in due keeping and care
of the sleeping wonder, and how many pilgrims visited this shrine, and
by how much mother church benefited by their dutiful generosity."

"and the first entry? what said it?"

"all too briefly, sir, it recorded in a faded passage that when the
saintly baldwin--may god assoil him!" quoth the friar, crossing
himself--"when baldwin, the first norman bishop in your holiness's
place, came here, he found yon martyr laid on a mean and paltry shelf
among the brothers' cells. all were gone who could tell his life and
history, but your predecessor, says the scroll, judging by the outward
marvel of his suspended life, was certain of that wondrous body's holy
beatitude, and, reflecting much, had him meetly robed and washed, and
placed him here. 'twas a good deed," sighed the studious boy.

"ah! and it has told to the advantage of the monastery," responded his
senior, and he came close up and bent low over me, so that i heard him
mutter, "strange old relic! i wonder how it feels to go so long as
that--if, indeed, he lives--without food. it was a clever thought of my
predecessor to convert the old mummy-bundle of swaddles into a norman
saint! baldwin was almost too good a man for the cloisters; with so
much shrewdness, he should have been a courtier!"

"oh!" i thought, "that is the way i came here, is it, my fat friend?"
and i lay as still as any of my comrade monuments while the old abbot
bent over me, chuckling to himself a bibulous chuckle, and pressing
his short, thick thumb into my sides as though he was sampling a plump
pigeon or a gosling at a village fair.

"by the forty saints that augustine sent to this benighted island,
he takes his fasting wonderfully well! he is firm in gammon and
brisket--and, by that saintly band, he has even a touch of color in his
cheeks, unless these flickering lights play my eyes a trick!" whereupon
his reverence regarded me with lively admiration, little witting it was
more than a breathless marvel, a senseless body, he was thus addressing.

in a moment he turned again: "thou didst not tell me the date of this
old fellow's--heaven forgive me!--of this blessed martyr's sleep. how
long ago said the chronicles since this wondrous trance began?"

"my lord, i computed the matter, and here, by that veracious,
unquestionable record, he has lain three hundred years and more!"

at this extraordinary statement the portly abbot whistled as though he
were on a country green, and i, so startling, so incredulous was it,
involuntarily turned my head toward them, and gathered my breath to
cast back that audacious lie. but neither movement nor sign was seen,
for at that very moment the quiet novice laid a finger upon the monk's
full sleeve and whispered hurriedly, "father!--the earl--the earl!" and
both looked down the chancel.

at the bottom the door swung open, giving a brief sight of the
pale-blue evening beyond, and there entered a tall and martial figure
who advanced in warlike harness to the altar steps, and, placing down
the helm decked with plumes that danced black and visionary in the dim
cresset light, he fell upon one knee.

"pax vobiscum, my son!" murmured the abbot, extending his hands in
blessing.

"et vobis," answered the gallant, "da mihi, domine reverendissime,
misericordiam vestram!" and at the sound of their voices i raised me
to my elbow, for the young warlike earl, as he bent him there, was
sheathed and armed in a way that i, though familiar with many camps,
had never seen before.

over his fine gold hauberk was a wondrous tabard, a magnificent
emblazoned surtout, and, as he knelt, the light of the waxen altar
tapers twinkled upon his steel vestments, they touched his yellow curls
and sparkled upon the jeweled links of the chain he had about his
neck; they gleamed from breast-plate and from belt; they illuminated
the thick-sown pearls and sapphires of his sword-hilt, and glanced
back in subdued radiance, as befited that holy place, from gauntlets
and gorget, from warlike furniture and lordly gems, down to the great
rowels of the golden spurs that decked his knightly heels.

the acolyte had shrunk into the shadows, and the earl had had his
blessing, when the abbot drew him into the recess where i lay in the
moonbeams, that he might speak him the more privately--that churchman
little guessing what a good listener the stern, cold saint, so trim and
prone upon his marble shrine, could be!

"ah, noble codrington," quoth the monk, "truly we will to the
confessional at once, since thou art in so much haste, and thou shalt
certainly travel the lighter for leaving thy load of transgressions to
the holy forgiveness of mother church; but first, tell me true, dost
thou really sail for france to-night?"

"holy father, at this very moment our vessels are waiting to be gone,
and all my good companions chafe and vex them for this my absence!"

"what! and dost thou start for hostile shores and bloody feuds with
half thy tithes and tolls unpaid to us? noble earl, wert thou to meet
with any mischance yonder--which heaven prevent!--and didst thou stand
ill with our exchequer in this particular, there were no hope for thee!
i tell thee thou wert as surely damned if thou diedst owing this holy
foundation aught of the poor contributions it asks of those to whom it
ministers as if thy life were one long count of wickedness! i will not
listen--i will not shrive thee until thou hast comported thyself duly
in this most important particular!"

"good father, thy warmth is unnecessary," replied the earl. "my worldly
matters are set straight, and my steward has orders to pay thee in full
all that may be owing between us; 'twas spiritual settlement i came to
seek."

"oh!" quoth his reverence, in an altered tone. "then thou art free at
once to follow the promptings of thy noble instinct, and serve thy king
and country as thou listest. i fear this will be a bloody war you go
to."

"'tis like to be," said the soldier, brightening up and speaking out
boldly on a subject he loved, his fine eyes flashing with martial
fire--"already the yellow sun of picardy flaunts on edward's royal
lilies!"

"ah," put in the monk, "and no doubt ripens many a butt of noble
malmsey."

"already the red soil of flanders is redder by the red blood of our
gallant chivalry!"

"yet even then not half so red, good earl, as the ripe brew of
burgundy--a jolly mellow brew that has stood in the back part of the
cellar, secure in the loving forbearance of twenty masters. talk
of renown--talk of thy leman--talk of honor and the breaking of
spears--what are all these to such a vat of beaded pleasures? i tell
thee, codrington, not even the fabled pool wherein the rhymers say the
cursed paynim looks to foretaste the delights of his sinful heaven
reflects more joy than such a cobwebbed tub. would that i had more of
them!" added the bibulous old priest after a pause, and sighing deeply.
as he did so an idea occurred to him, for he exclaimed, "look thee,
my gallant boy! thou art bound whither all this noble stuff doth come
from, and 'tis quite possible in the rough and tumble of bloody strife
thou may'st be at the turning inside out of many a fat roost and many
a well-stocked cellar. now, if this be so, and thou wilt remember me
when thou seest the gallant drink about to be squandered on the loose
gullets of base, scullion troopers, why then 'tis a bargain, and,
in paternal acknowledgment of this thy filial duty, i will hear thy
confession now, and thy penance, i promise, shall not be such as will
inconvenience thine active life."

the knight bent his head, somewhat coldly i thought, and then they
turned and went over to the oriel confessional, where the moonlight was
throwing from the window above a pallid pearly transcript of the mother
and her sweet nazarene babe, all in silver and opal tints, upon the
sacred woodwork, and as the priest's black shadow blotted the tender
picture out i heard him say:

"but mind, it must be good and ripe--'tis that vintage with the two
white crosses down by the vent that i like best--an thou sendest me
any sour calais layman tipple, thou art a forsworn heretic, with all
thy sin afresh upon thee--so discriminate," and the worthy churchman
entered to shrive and forgive, and as the casement closed upon him the
sweet, silent, indifferent shadows from above blossomed again upon the
doorway.

dreamy and drowsy i lay back and thought and wondered, for how long i
know not, but for long--until the dim aisles had grown midnight-silent
and the moon had set, and then an owl hooted on the ledges outside, and
at that sound, with a start and a sigh, i awoke once more.

"fools!" i muttered, thinking over what i had heard with dreamy
insequence--"fools, liars, to set such a date upon this rest of
mine! drunken churls! i will go at once to my fair saxon, to my
sweet nestlings--that is, if they be not yet to bed--and to-morrow i
will give that meager acolyte such a lesson in the misreading of his
missal-margins as shall last him till doomsday. by st. dunstan! he
shall play no more pranks with me--and yet, and yet, my heart misgives
me--my soul is loaded with foreboding, my spirit is sick within me.
where have i come to? who am i? gods! hapi, amenti of the golden
egyptian past, skogula, mista of the saxon hills and woods, grant that
this be not some new mischance--some other horrible lapse!" and i sat
up there on the white stone, and bowed my head and dangled my apostolic
heels against my own commemorative marbles below, while gusts of
alternate dread and indignation swept through the leafless thickets of
remembrance.

presently these meditations were disturbed by some very different
outward sensations. there came stealing over the consecrated pavements
of that holy pile the sound of singing, and it did not savor of angelic
harmony; it was rough, and jolly, and warbled and tripped about the
columns and altar steps in most unseemly sprightliness. "surely never
did st. gregory pen such a rousing chorus as that," i thought to
myself, as, with ears pricked, i listened to the dulcet harmonies.
and along with the music came such a merry odor as made me thirsty to
smell of it. 'twas not incense--'twas much more like cinnamon and
nutmegs--and never did censer--never did myrrh and galbanum smell so
much of burnt sack and roasted crab-apples as that unctuous, appetizing
taint.

i got down at once off my slab, and, being mighty hungry, as i then
discovered, i followed up that trail like a sleuth-hound on a slot. it
was not reverent, it did not suit my saintship, but down the steps i
went hot and hungry, and passed the reredos and crossed the apse, and
round the pulpit, and over the curicula, and through the aisles, and by
many a shrine where the tapers dimly burned i pressed, and so, with the
scent breast high, i flitted through an open archway into the checkered
cloisters. then, tripping heedlessly over the lettered slabs that kept
down the dust of many a roystering abbas, i--the latest hungry one of
the countless hungry children of time--followed down that jolly trail,
my apostolic linens tucked under my arm, jeweled miter on a head more
accustomed to soldier wear, and golden crook carried, alas! like a
hunter lance "at trail" in my other hand, till i brought the quest to
bay. at the end of the cloisters was a door set ajar, and along by
the jamb a mellow streak of yellow light was streaming out, rich with
those odors i had smelled and laden with laughter and the sound of
wine-soaked voices noisy over the end, it might be, of what seemed a
goodly supper. i advanced to the light, listened a moment, and then in
my imperious way pushed wide the panel and entered.

it was the refectory of the monastery, and a right noble hall wherein
ostentation and piety struggled for dominion. overhead the high
peaked ceiling was a maze of cunningly wrought and carved woodwork,
dark with time and harmonized with the assimilating touches of age.
round by the ample walls right and left ran a corridor into the dim
far distance; and crucifix and golden ewer, cunning saintly image,
and noble-branching silver candlesticks, gleamed in the dusk against
the ebony and polish of balustrade and paneling. under the heavy glow
of all these things the brothers' bare wooden table extended in long
demure lines; but wooden platter and black leathern mugs were now all
deserted and empty.

it was from the upper end came the light and jollity. here a wider
table was placed across the breadth of the hall, and upon it all was
sumptuous magnificence--holy poverty here had capitulated to priestly
arrogance. silver and gold, and rare glasses from cunning italian
molds, enriched about with shining enamels wherein were limned many an
ancient heathen fancy, shone and sparkled on that monkish board. on
either side, in mighty candelabra, bequeathed by superstition and fear,
there twinkled a hundred waxen candles, and up to the flames of these
steamed, as i looked, many a costly dish uncovered, and many a mellow
brew beaded and shining to the very brim of those jeweled horns and
beakers that were the chief accessories to that pleasant spread.

they who sat here seemed, if a layman might judge, right well able to
do justice to these things. half a dozen of them, jolly, rosy priors
and prelates, were round that supper table, rubicund with wine and
feeding, and in the high carved chair, coif thrown back from head, his
round, ruddy face aflush with liquor, his fat red hand asprawl about
his flagon, and his small eyes glazed and stupid in his drunkenness,
sat my friend the latest abbot of st. olaf's fane.

he had been singing, and, as i entered, the last distich died away upon
his lips, his round, close-cropped head, overwhelmed with the wine he
loved so much, sank down upon the table, the red vintage ran from the
overturned beaker in a crimson streak, and while his boon comrades
laughed long and loud his holiness slept unmindful. it was at this
very moment that i entered, and stood there in my ghostly linen, stern
and pale with fasting, and frowning grimly upon those godless revelers.
jove! it was a sight to see them blanch--to see the terror leap from
eye to eye as each in turn caught sight of me--to see their jolly jaws
drop down, and watch the sickly pallor sweeping like icy wind across
their countenances. so grim and silent did we face each other in that
stern moment that not a finger moved--not a pulse, i think, there beat
in all their bodies, and in that mighty hall not a sound was heard save
the drip, drip of the abbot's malmsey upon the floor and his own husky
snoring as he lay asleep amid the costly litter of his swinish meal.

stern, inflexible, there by the black backing of the portal i frowned
upon them--i, whom they only deemed of as a saint dead three hundred
years before--i, whom lifeless they knew so well, now stood vengeful
upon their threshold, scowling scorn and contempt from eyes where no
life should have been--can you doubt but they were sick at heart, with
pallid cheeks answering to coward consciences? for long we remained so,
and then, with a wild yell of terror they were all on foot, and, like
homing bats by a cavern mouth, were scrambling and struggling into the
gloom of the opposite doorway. i let them escape, then, stalking over
to the archway, thrust the wicket to upon the heels of the last flyer,
and glad to be so rid of them, shot the bolt into the socket and barred
that entry.

then i went back to my friend the abbot, and stood, reflective,
behind him, wondering whether it were not a duty to humanity to rid
it of such a knave even as he slept there. but while i stood at his
elbow contemplating him, the unwonted silence told upon his dormant
faculties, and presently the heavy head was raised, and, after an
inarticulate murmur or two, he smiled imbecilely, and, picking up the
thread of his revelry, hiccoughed out: "the chorus, good brothers!--the
chorus--and all together!"

die we must, but let us die drinking at an inn.
hold the winecup to our lips sparkling from the bin!
so, when angels flutter down to take us from our sin,
"ah! god have mercy on these sots!" the cherubs will begin.

"why, you rogues!" he said, as his drunken melody found no echo in the
great hall--"why, you sleepy villains! am i a strolling troubadour that
i should sing thus alone to you?" and then, as his bleared and dazzled
eyes wandered round the empty places, the spilled wine and overturned
trestles, he smiled again with drunken cunning. "ah!" he muttered;
"then they must be all under the tables! i thought that last round of
sack would finish them! hallo, there! ambrose! de vœux! jervaulx! jolly
comrades!--sleepy dogs! come forth! fie on ye!--to call yourselves good
monks, and yet to leave thy simple, kindly prior thus to himself!" and
he pulled up the table linen and peered below. sorely was the churchman
perplexed to see nothing; and first he glared up among the oaken
rafters, as though by chance his fellows had flown thither, and then
he stared at the empty places, and so his gaze wandered round, until,
in a minute or two, it had made the complete circle of the place, and
finally rested on me, standing, immovable, a pace from his elbow.

at first he stared upon me with vapid amusement, and then with stupid
wonder. but it was not more than a second or two before the truth
dawned upon that hazy intellect, and then i saw the thick, short hands
tighten upon the carving of his priestly throne, i saw the wine flush
pale upon his cheeks, and the drunken light in his eyes give place to
the glare of terror and consternation. just as they had done before
him, but with infinite more intensity, he blanched and withered before
my unrelenting gaze, he turned in a moment before my grim, imperious
frown, from a jolly, rubicund old bibber, rosy and quarrelsome with
his supper, into a cadaverous, sober-minded confessor, lantern-jawed
and yellow--and then with a hideous cry he was on foot and flying for
the doorway by which his friends had gone! but i had need of that good
confessor, and ere he could stagger a yard the golden apostolic crook
was about the ankle of the errant sheep, and the prior of st. olaf's
rolled over headlong upon the floor.

i sat down to supper, and as i helped myself to venison pasty and
malmsey i heard the beads running through the recumbent abbot's fingers
quicker than water runs from a spout after a summer thunder shower.
"misericordia, domine, nobis!" murmured the old sinner, and i let him
grovel and pray in his abject panic for a time, then bade him rise.
now, the fierceness of this command was somewhat marred, because my
mouth was very full just then of pasty crust, and the accents appeared
to carry less consternation into my friend's heart than i had intended.
the paternoster began to run with more method and coherence, and,
soon finding he was not yet halfway to that nether abyss he had seen
opening before him, he plucked up a little heart of grace. besides, the
avenger was at supper, and making mighty inroads into the provender
the abbot loved so well: this took off the rough edge of terror, and
was in itself so curious a phenomenon that little by little, with
the utmost circumspection, the monk raised his head and looked at
me. i kept my baleful eyes turned away, and busied me with my loaded
platter--which, by the way, was far the most interesting item of the
two--and so by degrees he gained confidence, and came into a sitting
position, and gazed at the hungry saint, so active with the victuals,
wonder and awe playing across his countenance. "i see, sir priest," i
said, "you have a good cook yonder in the buttery," but the abbot was
as yet too dazed to answer, so i went on to put him more at his ease
(for i designed to ask him some questions later on), "now, where i come
from, the great fault of the cooks is, they appreciate none of your
norman niceties--they broil and roast forever, as though every one had
a hunter appetite, and thus i have often been weary of their eternal
messes of pork and kine."

"holy saints!" quoth the abbot. "i did not dream you had any cooks at
all."

"no cooks! thou fat wine-vat, what, didst thou think we ate our viands
raw?"

"heaven forbid!" the abbot gasped. "but, truly, your sanctity's
experiences astound me! 'tis all against the canons. and if they be
thus, as you say, at their trenchers, may i ask, in all humbleness and
humility, how your blessed friends are at their flagons?"

"ah! sir, good fellows enough my jolly comrades, but caring little for
thy red and purple vintages, liking better the merry ale that autumn
sends, and the honeyed mead, yet in their way as merry roysterers for
the most part as though they were all norman abbots," i said, glancing
askance at him.

by this time the prior was on his feet, as sober as could be, but
apparently infinitely surprised and perplexed at what he saw and heard.
he cogitated, and then he diffidently asked: "an it were not too
presumptive, might i ask if your saintship knows the blessed oswald?"

"not i."

"nor yet the holy sewall de monteign?" he queried with a sigh--"once
head of these halls and cells."

"never heard of him in my life."

"nor yet of grindal? or gerard of bayeux? or the saintly anselm, my
predecessor in that chair you fill?" groaned the jolly confessor.

"i tell you, priest, i know none of them--never heard their names or
aught of them till now."

"alas! alas!" quoth the monk, "then if none of these have won to
heaven, if none of these are known to thee so newly thence, there can
be but small hope for me!" and his fat round chin sank upon his ample
chest, and he heaved a sigh that set the candles all a-flickering
halfway down the table.

"why, priest, what art thou talking of?--paradise and long-dead saints?
'twas of the saxons--harold's saxons--my jolly comrades and allies in
arms when last in life, i spoke."

"ho! ho! was that so? why, i thought thou wert talking of things
celestial all this while, though, in truth, thy speech sorted
astounding ill with all i had heard before!"

"i think, father," i responded, "there is more burnt sack under thy
ample girdle than wit beneath thy cowl. but never mind, we will not
quarrel. sit down, fill yon tankard (for dryness will not, i fancy,
improve thy eloquence), and tell me soberly something of this nap of
mine."

"ah, but, sir, i was never very good at such studious work," the monk
replied, seating himself with uneasy obedience: "if i might but fetch
in our clerk--though, in truth, i cannot imagine why and whither he has
gone--he is one who has by heart the things thou wouldst know."

"stir a foot, priest," i said, with feigned anger, "and thou art but a
dead abbot! tell me so much as your muddled brain can recall. now, when
i supped here before that yellow-skinned norman william sat upon the
english throne"

"saints in paradise! what, he who routed harold, and founded yonder
abbey of battle--impossible!"

"what, dost thou bandy thy ‘impossible' with me? slave, if thou cast
again but one atom of doubt, one single iota of thy heretic criticism
here, thou shalt go thyself to perdition and seek sewall de monteign
and gerard of bayeux," and i laid my hand upon my crook.

"misericordia! misericordia!" stammered the abbot. "i meant no ill
whatever, but the extent of thy holiness's astounding abstinence
overwhelmed me."

"why, then to your story. but i am foolish to ask. you cannot, you
dare not, tell me again that lie of thy acolyte, that three hundred
years have passed since then. look up, say 'twas false, and that single
word shall unburden here," and i struck my breast, "a soul of a load
of dread and fear heavier than ever was lifted by priestly absolution
before."

but still he hung his face, and i heard him mutter that fifty
white-boned abbots lay in the cloisters, heel to head, and the first
one was a kinsman of william's, and the last was his own predecessor.

"then, if thou darest not answer this question, who reigns above us
now? has the norman star set, as i once hoped it might, behind the red
cloud of rebellion? or does it still shine to the shame of all saxons?"

"sir saint," answered the monk, with a little touch of the courage and
pride of his race gleaming for a moment through his drunken humility,
"rebellion never scared the norman power--so much i know for certain;
and saxon and norman are one by the grace of god, linked in brotherhood
under the noble edward. expurgate thy divergences; erase ‘invaders and
invaded' from thy memory, and drink as i drink --if, indeed, all this
be news to thee--for the first time to ‘england and to the english!'"

"waes hael, sir monk--‘england and the english!'"

"drink hael, good saint!" he answered, giving me the right acceptance
of my flagon challenge, "and i do hereby receive thee most paternally
into the national fold! nevertheless, thou art the most perplexing
martyr that ever honored this holy fane"--and he raised the great
silver cup to his lips and took a mighty pull. then he gazed
reflectively for a moment into the capacious measure, as though
the pageantry of history were passing across the shining bottom in
fantastic sequence, and looked up and said--"most wonderful--most
wonderful! why, then, you know nothing of william the red?"

"the william i knew was red enough in the hands."

"ah! but this other one who followed him was red on the head as well,
and an anselm was archbishop while he reigned."

"well, and who came next in thy preposterous tale?"

"henry plantagenet--unless all this sack confuses my memory--i have
told thee, good saint, i am better at mass and breviar than at missals
and scroll."

"and better, no doubt, than either at thy cellar score-book, priest!
but what befell your henry?"

"frankly, i am not very certain; but he died eventually."

"'tis the wont of kings no less than of lesser folk. pass me yon bread
platter, and fill thy flagon. so much history, i see, makes thee husky
and sad!"

"well, then came stephen de blois, the son of adeliza, who was daughter
to the conqueror."

"forsworn priest!" i exclaimed at that familiar name, leaping to my
feet and swinging the great gold flail into the air, "that is a falser
lie than any yet. the noble adeliza was troth to harold, and had no
children; unsay it, or" and here the crook poised ominously over
the shrieking abbot's head.

"i lied! i lied!" yelled the monk, cowering under the swing of my
weapon like a partridge beneath a falcon's circlings, and then, as the
crook was thrown down on the table again, he added: "'twas adela, i
meant; but what it should matter to thee whether it were adeliza or
adela passes my comprehension," and the monk smoothed out his ruffled
feathers.

"proceed! it is not for thee to question. wrought stephen anything more
notable to thy mind than henry?"

"well, sir, i recall, now thou puttest me to it, that he laid rough
hands upon the sacred persons of our bishops once or twice, yet he was
much indebted to them. didst ever draw sword in a good quarrel, sir
saint?"

"didst ever put thy fingers into a venison pasty, sir priest? because,
if thou hast, as often, and oftener, have i done according to thy
supposition."

"why, then, i wonder you lay still upon yonder white marble slab while
all the northern bishops were up in arms for stephen, and on bloody
northallerton moor broke the power of the cruel northmen forever. that
day, sir, the sacred flags of st. cuthbert of durham, st. peter of
york, st. john of beverley, st. wilfred of ripon, not to mention the
holy thurstan's ruddy pennon, led the van of battle. 'tis all set out
in a pretty scroll that we have over the priory fireplace, else, as you
will doubtless guess, i had never remembered so much of detail."

"anyhow, it is well recalled. who came next?"

"another henry, and he made the saintly thomas becket archbishop in
the year of grace 1162, and afterward the holy prelate was gathered to
bliss."

"thy history is mostly exits and entries, but perhaps it is none the
less accurate for all that. and now thou wilt say this henry was no
more lasting than his kinsman--he too died."

"completely and wholly, sir, so that the burly richard cœur de lion
reigned in his stead; and then came john, who was at best but a wayward
vassal of st. peter's chair."

"down with him, jolly abbot! and mount another on the shaky throne of
thy fantastic narrative. i am weary of the succession already, and
since we have come so far away from where i thought we were i care for
no great niceties of detail. put thy sovereigns to the amble, make them
trot across the stage of thy hazy recollection, or thou wilt be asleep
before thou canst stall and stable half of them."

"well, then, a henry came after john, and an edward followed him--then
another of the name--and then a third--that noble edward in whose sway
the realm now is, and in whom (save some certain exactions of rent and
taxes) mother church perceives a glorious and a warlike son. but it is
a long muster roll from the time of thy norman monarch to this year of
grace 1346."

"a long roll!" i muttered to myself, turning away from my empty
plate--"horrible, immense, and vast! good lord! what shadows are these
men who come and go like this! wonderful and dreadful! that all those
tinseled puppets of history--those throbbing epitomes of passion and
godlike hopes--should have budded, and decayed, and passed out into the
void, finding only their being, to my mind, in the shallow vehicle of
this base churchman's wine-vault breath. dreadful, quaint, abominable!
to think that all these flickering human things have paced across the
sunny white screen of life--like the colored fantasies yonder stained
windows threw upon my sleeping eyes--and yet i only but wake hungry
and empty, unchanged, unmindful, careless!--priest!" i said aloud, so
sudden and fiercely that the monk leaped to his feet with a startled
cry from the drunken sleep into which he had fallen--"priest! dost fear
the fires of thy purgatory?"

"ah, glorious miracle! but--but surely thou wouldst not"

"why, then, answer me truly, swear by that great crucified form there
shining in the taper light above thy throne, swear by him to whom thou
nightly offerest the hyssop incense of thy beastly excesses--swear, i
say!"

"i do--i do!" exclaimed st. olaf's priest in extravagant terror, as
i towered before him with all my old phrygian fire emphasized by the
sanctity of my extraordinary repute. "i swear!" he said; but, seeing me
hesitate, he added, "what wouldst thou of thy poor, unworthy servant?"

'twas not so easy to answer him, and i hung my head for a moment; then
said: "when i died--in the norman time, thou rememberest--there was a
woman here, and two sunny little ones, blue in the eyes and comely to
look upon there, shut thy stupid mouth, and look not so astounded!
i tell thee they were here--here, in st. olaf's hall--here, at this
very high table between me and st. olaf's abbot--three tender flowers,
old man, set in the black framing of a hundred of thy corded, wondering
brotherhood. now, tell me--tell me the very simple truth--is there such
a woman here, tall and fair, and melancholy gracious? are there such
babes in thy cloisters or cells?"

"it is against the canons of our order."

"a malison on thee and thy order! is there, then, no effigy in yon
chancel, no tablet, no record of her--i mean of that noble lady and
those comely little ones?"

"i know of none, sir saint."

"think again. she was a franklin, she had wide lands; she reverenced
thy church, and in her grief, being woman, she would turn devout.
surely she built some shrine, or made thee a portico, or blazoned a
window to shame rough fate with the evidence of her gentleness?"

"there is none such in st. olaf's. but, now thou speakest of shrines, i
do remember one some hours' ride from here; unroofed and rotten, but,
nevertheless, such as you suggest, and in it there is a cenotaph, and
a woman laid out straight. she is cracked across the middle and mossy,
and there be two small kneeling figures by her head, but i never looked
nicely to determine whether they were blessed cherubin or but common
children. the shepherds who keep their flocks there and shelter from
the showers under the crumbling walls call the place voewood."

"enough, priest," i said, as i paced hither and thither across the
hall in gloomy grief, and then taking my hasty resolution i turned to
him sternly--"make what capital thou list of to-night's adventure, but
remember the next time thou seest a saint may heaven pity thee if thou
art not in better sort--turn thy face to the wall!"

the frightened abbot obeyed; i shed in a white heap upon the floor
my saintly vestments, my miter and crook on top, and then, stepping
lightly down the hall, mounted upon a bench, unfastened and threw open
a lattice, and, placing my foot upon the sill, sprang out into the
night and open world again!

i walked and ran until the day came, southward constantly, now and
again asking my way of an astonished hind, but for the most part guided
by some strange instinct, and before the following noon i was at my old
saxon homestead.

but could it be voewood? not a vestige of a house anywhere in that wide
grassy glade where voewood stood, not a sign of life, not a sound to
break the stillness! near by there ran a little brook, and against
it, just as the monk had said, were the four gray walls of a lonely
roofless shrine. over the shrine, on the very spot where voewood
stood--alas! alas!--was a long, grassy knoll, crowned with hawthorns
and little flowers shining in the sunlight. i went into the ruined
chapel, and there, stained and lichened and broken, in the thorny
embrace of the brambles, lay the marble figure of my sweet saxon wife,
and by the pillow--green-velveted with the tapestry of nature--knelt
her little ones on either side. i dropped upon my knee and buried my
face in her crumbling bosom and wept. what mattered the eclipse while
i slept of all those kingly planets that had shone in the english
firmament compared to the setting of this one white star of mine? i
rushed outside to the mound that hid the forgotten foundations of my
home, and, as the passion swept up and engulfed my heart, i buried
my head in my arms and hurled myself upon the ground and cursed that
tender green moss that should have been so hard--cursed that golden
english sunlight that suited so ill with my sorrows--and cursed again
and again in my bitterness those lying blossoms overhead that showered
down their petals on me, saying it was spring, when it was the blackest
winter of desolation, the night-time of my disappointment.

chapter ix

i am not of a nature to be long overwhelmed. all that night and
far into the next day i lay upon voewood, alternately sleeping and
bewailing the chance which tossed me to and fro upon the restless ocean
of time, and then i arose. i threw my arms round each in turn of those
dear, callous ones in the chapel, and pushed back the brambles from
them, and wept a little, and told myself the pleasure-store of life
was now surely spent to the very last coin--then, with a mighty effort,
tore myself away. again and again, while the smooth swell of the
grassy mound under which the foundations of the long-destroyed saxon
homestead with the little chapel by the rivulet were in sight, i turned
and turned, loth and sad. but no sooner had the leafy screen hid them
than i set off and ran whither i knew not, nor cared--indeed, i was so
terribly drawn by that spot--so close in the meshes of its association,
so thralled by the presence of the dust of all i had had to lose or
live for, that i feared, if the best haste were not made, i should
neither haste nor fly from that terribly sweet hillock of lamentations
forever.

what could it matter where my wandering feet were turned? all the
world was void and vapid, east and west alike indifferent, to one so
homeless, and thus i stalked on through glades and coppices for hours
and days, with my chin upon my chest, and feeling marvelously cheap and
lonely. but enough of this. never yet did i crave sympathy of any man:
why should i seem to seek it of you--skeptical and remote?

there were those who appeared at that time to take compassion on
me unasked, and i remember the countrywomen at whose cottage doors
i hesitated a moment--yearning with pent-up affection over their
curly-headed little ones--added to the draught of water i begged such
food as their slender stores provided. one of these gave me a solid
green forester's cape and jerkin; another put shoes of leather upon my
feet; and a third robbed her husband's pegs to find me headwear, and so
through the gifts of their unspoken good-will i came by degrees into
the raiment of the time.

but nothing seemed to hide the inexpressible strangeness i began to
carry about with me. no sorry apparel, no woodman's cap drawn down
over my brows, no rustic clogs upon my wandering feet, masked me
for a moment from the awe and wonder of these good english people.
none of them dared ask me a question, how i came or where i went, but
everywhere it was the same. they had but to look upon me, and up they
rose, and in silence, and, drawn involuntarily by that stern history
of mine they knew naught of, they ministered to me according to their
means. the women dropped their courtesies, and--unasked, unasking--fed
the grim and ragged stranger from their cleanest platter, the men stood
by and uncapped them to my threadbare russet, and whole groups would
watch spellbound upon the village mounds as i paced moodily away.

in course of time my grief began to mend, so that it was presently
possible to take a calmer view of the situation, and to bend my
thoughts upon what it were best to do next. though i love the
greenwood, and am never so happy as when solitary, yet my nature
was not made, alas! for sylvan idleness. i felt i had the greatest
admiration and brotherhood with those who are recluse and shun the
noisy struggles of the world; yet had i always been a leader of men,
i now remembered, as all the pages of my past history came one by one
before me and i meditated upon them day and night. no, i was not made
to walk these woods alone, and, if another argument were wanting, it
were found in the fact that i was here exposed to every weather, hungry
and shelterless! i could not be forever begging from door to door,
eternally throwing my awe-inspiring shadow across the lintels of these
gentle-mannered woodland folk, and my tastes, though never gluttonous,
rebelled most strongly against the perpetual dietary of herbs and roots
and limpid brooks.

reflecting on these things one day, as i lay friendless and ragged
in the knotty elbow of a great oak's earth-bare roots, after some
weeks of homeless wandering, i fell asleep, and dreamed all the fair
shining landscape were a tented field, and all the rustling rushes
down by the neighboring streamlet's banks were the serried spears of a
great concourse of soldiers defiling by, the sparkle of the sunlight
on the ripples seeming like the play of rays upon their many warlike
trappings, the yellow flags and water-flowers making no poor likeness
of dancing banners and bannerets.

'twas a simple dream, such as came of an empty stomach and a full
head, yet somehow i woke from that sleep with more of my old pulse of
pleasure and life beating in my veins than had been there for a long
time. and with the wish for another spell of bright existence, spent in
the merry soldier mood that suited me so well, came the means to attain
it.

in the first stage of these wanderings, while still fresh from the
cloister shrine, i had paid but the very smallest heed to my attire
and its details. i was clad in clean, sufficient wraps, so much was
certain, with a linen belt about me, and sandals upon my feet; yet
even this was really more than i noticed with any closeness. but as i
ran and walked, and my flesh grew hot and nervous with the fever of
my sorrow, a constant chafing of my feet and hands annoyed me. i had
stopped by a woodside river bank, and there discovered with wrathful
irritation that upon my bare apostolic toes and upon my sanctified
thumbs--those soldier thumbs still flat and strong with years of
pressing sword-hilts and bridle-reins--there were glistening in holy
splendor such a set of gorgeous gems as had rarely been taken for a
scramble through the woods before! there were beryls and sapphires
and pearls, and ruddy great rubies from the caftans of paynim chiefs
slain by long-dead crusaders, and onyx and emerald from cyprus and the
remotest east set in rude red gold by the rough artificers of rearward
ages, and all these put upon me, no doubt, after the manner in which
at that time credulous piety was wont to bedeck the shrine and images
of saints and martyrs. i was indeed at that moment the wealthiest
beggar who ever sat forlorn and friendless on a grassy lode. but what
was all this glistening store to me, desolate and remorseful, with
but one remembrance in my heart, with but one pitiful sight before
my eyes? i pulled the shining gems angrily from my swollen fingers
and toes and hurled them one by one, those princely toys, into the
muddy margin of the stream, and there, in that rude setting, ablazing,
red, and green, and white, and hot and cool, with their wonderful
scintillations they mocked me. they mocked me as i sat there with my
chin in my palms, and twinkled and shone among the sludge and scum so
merrily to the flickering sunshine, that presently i laughed a little
at those cheerful trinkets that could shine so bravely in the contumacy
of chance, and after a time i picked up one and rinsed it and held it
out in the sunshine, and found it very fair--so fair, indeed, that a
glimmer of listless avarice was kindled within me, and later on i broke
a hawthorn spray and groped among the sedge and mire and hooked out
thus, in better mood, the greater part of my strange inheritance.

then, here i was, upon this other bank, waking up after my dream, and,
turning over the better to watch the fair landscape stretching below,
my waistcloth came unbound, and out upon the sand amid the oak roots
rolled those ambient, glistening rings again. at first i was surprised
to see such jewels in such a place, staring in dull wonderment while
i strove to imagine whence they came, but soon i remembered piece by
piece their adventure as has been told to you, and now, with the warm
blood in my veins again, i did not throw them by, but lay back against
the oak and chuckled to myself as my ambitious heart fluttered with
pleasure under my draughty rags, and crossed my legs, and weighed upon
my finger-tips, and inventoried, and valued, all in the old merchant
spirit, those friendly treasures.

how unchanging are the passions of humanity! i tossed those radiant
playthings up in the sunlight and caught them, i counted and recounted
them, i tore shreds from my clothing and cleaned and polished each in
turn, i started up angry and suspicious as a kite's wheeling shadow
fell athwart my hoard. forgotten was hunger and houselessness--i no
longer mourned so keenly the emptiness of the world or the brevity of
friendships: i, to whom these treasures should have been so light,
overlooked nearly all my griefs in them, and was as happy for the
moment in this unexpected richness as a child.

and then, after an hour or so of cheerful avarice, i sat up sage and
reflective, and, having swathed and wrapped my store safely next my
heart, i must needs climb the first grassy knoll showing above the
woodlands and search the horizon for some place wherein a beginning
might be made of spending it. nothing was to be seen thence but a
goodly valley spread out at a distance, and there my steps were
turned--for men, like streams, ever converge upon the lowlands.

now that i had the heart to fall into beaten tracks, coming out of
the sheltering thicket byways for the first time since quitting the
mounds over the ashes of voewood, i observed more of the new people
and times among whom fate had thus thrown me. and truly it was a
very strange meeting with these folk, who were they whom i had known
when last i walked these woods, and yet were not. i would stare at
them in perplexity, marveling at the wondrous blend of nations i
saw in face and hair and eyes. their very clothes were novel to me,
and unaccountable, while their speech seemed now the oddest union of
many tongues--all foreign, yet upon these english lips most truly
native--and wondrous to listen to. i would pass a sturdy yokel
leading out his teams to plowing, and when i spoke to him it made my
ears tingle to hear how antique roman went hand in hand with ancient
british, and good norman was linked upon his lips with better saxon!
that polyglot youth, knowing no tongue but one, was most scholarly in
his ignorance. to him 'twas english that he spoke; but to me, who had
lived through the making of that noble speech, who knew each separate
individual quantity that made that admirable whole, his jargon was most
wonderful!

nor was i yet fully reconciled to the unity of these new people and
their mutual kinsmanship. i could not remember all feuds were ended.
when down the path would come a more than usually dusky wayfarer--a
trooper, perhaps, with leather jerkin, shield on back, and sword by
side--i would note his swart complexion and dark black hair, and then
'twas "ho! ho! a norman villain straying from his band!" and back i
would step among the shadows, and, gripping the staff that was my
only weapon, scowl on him while he whistled by, half mindful, in my
forgetfulness, to help the saxon cause by rapping the fellow over his
head. on the other hand if one chanced upon me who had the flaxen hair
and pleasant eyes of those who once were called my comrades--if he wore
the rustic waistless smock, as many did still, of hind or churl--why,
then, i was mighty glad to see that saxon, and crossed over, friendly,
to his pathway, bespeaking him in the pure tongue of his forefathers,
asked him of garth and homestead, and how fared his thane and
heretoga--all of which, it grieved me afterward to notice, perplexed
him greatly.

not only in these ways was there much for me to learn, but, with speech
and fashions, modes and means of life had changed. at one time i met
a strange piebald creature, all tags and tassels, white and red, with
a hundred little bells upon him, a cap with peaks hanging down like
asses' ears, and a staff, with more bells, tucked away under his arm.
he was plodding along dejected, so i called to him civilly:

"why, friend! who are you?"

"i am a fool, sir!"

"never mind," i replied cheerfully, "there is the less likelihood of
your ever treading this earth companionless."

"why, that is true enough," he said, "for it was too much wisdom that
sent me thus solitary afield," and he went on to tell me how he had
been ejected that morning from a neighboring castle. "i had belauded
and admired my master for years--therein i had many friends, yet was
a fool. yesterday we quarreled about some trifle--i called him beast
and tyrant, and therein, being just and truthful, i lost my place and
comrades over the first wise thing i said for years!--it is a most
sorry, disorderly world."[2]

[2] the phœnician must have failed to recognize in the new finery of
the time the latest representative of a brotherhood that had long
existed.

this strange individual, it seemed, lived by folly, and, though i had
often noticed that wit was not a fat profession, i could not help
regarding him with wonder. he was, under his veneer of shallowness, a
most gentle and observant jester. long study in the arts of pleasing
had given him a very delicate discrimination of moods and men. he could
fit a merriment to the capacity of any man's mind with extraordinary
acumen. he had stores of ill-assorted learning in the empty galleries
of his head, and wherewithal a kindly, gentle heart, a whimsical
companionship for sad-eyed humanity which made him haste to laugh at
everything through fear of crying over it. we were companions before we
had gone a mile, and many were the things i learned of him. when our
way parted i pressed one of my rings into his hand. "good-by, fool!" i
said.

"good-by, friend!" he called. "you are the first wise man with whom i
ever felt akin"; and indeed, as his poor buffoon's coat went shining up
the path, i felt bereft and lonely again for a spell.

then i found another craftsman of this curious time. a little way
farther on, near by to a lordly house standing in wide stretches of
meadow and park lands, a most plaintive sound came from a thicket lying
open to the sun. such a dismal moaning enlisted my compassion, for
here, i thought, is some luckless wight just dying or, at least, in
bitterest extremity of sorrow: so i approached, stepping lightly round
the blossoming thicket--peering this way and that, and now down on my
hands and knees to look under the bushes, and now on tiptoe, craning
my neck that i might see over, and so, presently, i found the source
of the sighs and moans. it was a young man of most dainty proportions,
with soft, fine-combed hair upon his pretty sloping shoulders, his
sleeves so long they trailed upon the moss, his shoes laced with
golden threads and toed and tasseled in monstrous fashion. a most
delicate perfume came from him: his clothes were greener than grass in
springtime, turned back, and puffed with damask. in his hand he had a
scroll whereon now and again he looked, and groaned in most plaintive
sort.

"why, man," i asked, "what ails you? why that dreadful moaning? what
are you, and what is yon scroll?" so absorbed was he, however, it was
only when i had walked all round him to spy the wound, if it might
be, that he suffered from, and finally stood directly in his sunshine,
repeating the question, that he looked up.

"interrupter of inspiration! hast thou asked what i am, and what this
is?"

"yes; and more than once."

"fie! not to see! i am a minstrel--a bard; my lord's favorite poet up
at yonder castle, and this is an ode to his mistress's eyebrows. i was
in travail of a rhyme when thy black shadow fell upon the page."

"give me the leaf! why, it is the sickliest stuff that ever did
dishonor to virgin paper! there, take it back," i said, angry to find
so many fools abroad, "and listen to me! you may be a poet, for i
have no experience of them, but as i am a man thou art not a bard!
you a bard! you the likeness and descendant of howell ap griffith
and a hundred other saxon gleemen! you one of the guild of gryffith
ap conan--you a scop or a skald!--why, boy, they could write better
stuff than thou canst though they had been drunk for half a day! you
a stirrer of passions--you a minstrel--you a tightener of the strong
sinews of warrior hearts!--fie! for shame upon your silly trivial
sonnets, your particolored suits and sweet insipid vaporings! out, i
say! get home to thy lady's footstool, or, by thor and odin, i will
give thee a beating out of pure respect for noble rhyming!"

the poet did not wait to argue. i was angry and rough, and the
rudest-clad champion that ever swung a flail in the cause of the muses.
so he took to his heels, and as i watched that pretty butterfly aiming
across the sunny meadows for his master's portals, and stopping not for
hedge or ditch, "by hoth," i said, laughing scornfully, "we might have
been friends if he could but have writ as well as he can run!"

then i went on again, and had not gone far, when down the road there
came ambling on a mule a crafty-looking churchman, with big wallets
hanging at his saddle-bows, a portentous rosary round his neck, and
bare, unwashed feet hanging stirrupless by his palfrey's side.

"now here's another tradesman," i muttered to myself, "of this most
perplexing age. heaven grant his wares are superior to the last ones!
good-morning, father!"

"good-morning, son! art going into the town to take up arms for christ
and his servant edward?"

"yes," i answered, "i am bound to the town, but i have not yet chosen a
master."

"then you are all the more sure to go to the fighting, for every one,
just now, who has no other calling, is apprentice to arms."

"it will not be the first time i have taken that honorable indenture."

"no, i guess not," said the shrewd friar, eyeing me under his penthouse
eyebrows, "for thou art a stout and wiry-looking fellow, and may i
never read anything better than my breviary again if i cannot construe
in your face a good and varied knowledge of camps and cities. but there
was something else i had to say to you." ["here comes the point of the
narrative," i thought to myself.] "now, so trim a soldier as you, and
one wherewithal so reflective, would surely not willingly go where
hostile swords are waving and cruel french spears are thicker than
yonder tall-bladed glass, unshriven--with all thy sins upon thy back?"

"why then, monk, i must stay at home. is that what you would say?"

"nay, not at all. there is a middle way. but soft! hast any money with
thee?"

"enough to get a loaf of bread and a cup of ale."

"oh!" said the secret pardoner (for his calling was then under ban
and fine), a little disappointedly, "that is somewhat small, but yet,
nevertheless," he muttered partly to himself, "these are poor times,
and when all plump partridges are abroad mother church's falcons must
necessarily fly at smaller game. look here! good youth. forego thy
mortal appetites, defer thy bread and ale, and for that money saved
thereby i will sell thee one of these priceless parchments here in my
wallet--scrolls, young man, hot from the holy footstool of our blessed
father in rome, and carrying complete unction and absolution to the
soul of their possessor! think, youth! is not eternal redemption worth
a cup of muddy ale? fie to hesitate! line thy bosom with this blessed
scroll, and go to war cleaner-hearted than a new-born babe. there! i
will not be exacting. for one of those silver groats i fancy i see tied
in thy girdle i will give thee absolute admittance into the blessed
company of saints and martyrs. i tell thee, man, for half a zecchin i
will make thee comrade of christ and endow thee with eternity! is it a
bargain?"

silent and disdainful, i, who had seen a dozen hierarchies rise and
set in the various peopled skies of the world, took the parchment from
him and turned away and read it. it was, as he said--more shame on
human intellect!--a full pardon of the possessor's sins wrote out in
bad norman latin, and bearing the sign and benediction of st. peter's
chair. i read it from top to bottom, then twisted its red tapes round
it again and threw it back to that purveyor of absolutions. yes; and i
turned upon that reverend traveler and scorned and scouted him and his
contemptible baggage. i told him i had met two sad fools since noon,
but he was worse than either. i scoffed him, just as my bitter mood
suggested, until i had spent both breath and invention, then turned
contemptuous, and left him at bay, mumbling inarticulate maledictions
upon my biting tongue.

no more of these shallow panderers fell in my path to vex and irritate
me, and before the white evening star was shining through the brilliant
tapestry of the sunset over the meadow-lands in the west, i had drawn
near to and entered the strong, shadowy, moated walls of my first
english city.

chapter x

i took lodgings that evening with some rough soldiers who kept guard
over the town gate, and slept as soundly by their watch-fire as though
my country clothes were purple, and a stony bench in an angle of the
walls were a princely couch. but when the morning came i determined to
better my condition.

with this object in view one of the smallest of my rings was selected,
and, with this conveniently hidden, i went down into the town to search
for a jeweler's. a strange town indeed it struck me as being. narrow
and many were the streets, and paved with stones; timber and plaster
jutting out overhead so as to lessen the fair, free sky to a narrow
strip, and greatly to compress my country spirit. at every lattice
window, so amply provided with glass as i had never known before, they
were hanging out linen at that early hour to air; and the 'prentice
lads came yawning and stretching to their masters' shutter booths, and
every now and then down the quaint streets of that curious city which
had sprung--peopled with a new race--from the earth during the long
night of my sleep, there rumbled a country tumbril loaded with rustic
things, whereat the women came out to chaffer and buy of the smocked
cartsmen who spoke the glib english so novel to my ear and laughed
and gossiped with them. the early ware i noticed in his cart was still
damp and sparkling with the morning dew, so close upon the dawn had he
come in, and there in the town where the deep street shadows still lay
undisturbed, now and then a jew, still ashamed, it seemed, to meet any
of those sleepy christian eyes, would steal by to an early bargain,
wrapped to his chin in his gabardine--i knew that garment a thousand
years ago--and fearfully slinking, in that intolerant time, from house
to house and shadow to shadow.

now and then as i sauntered along in a city of novelties, a couple
of revelers in extraordinary various clothes, their toes longer than
their sleeves, their velvet caps quaintly peaked, and slashed doublets
showing gay vests below, came reeling and singing up the back ways,
making the half-waked dogs dozing in the gutters snarl and snap at
them, and disturbing the morning meal of the crows rooting in the
litter-heaps.

as the sun came up, and the fresh, white light of that fair plantagenet
morning crept down the faces of the eastward walls, the city woke
to its daily business. a page came tripping over the cobbles with a
message in his belt, the good wives were astir in the houses, and the
'prentices fell to work manfully on booth and bars as merchant and
mendicant, early gallant and basketed maid, began the day in earnest.

all these things i saw from under the broad rim of my rustic hat--my
ragged, sorrel-green cloak thrown over my shoulder and across my face,
and, so disguised, silent, observant--now recognizing something of that
yesterday that was so long ago, and anon sad and dubious, i went on
until i found what i sought for, and came into a smooth, broad street,
where the jewelers had their stalls. i chose one of those who seemed in
a fair way of business, and entered.

"are you the master here?" i asked of a gray-bearded merchant who was
searching for the spectacles he had put away overnight.

"my neighbors say so," he answered gruffly.

"then i would trade with you."

whereon--having found and adjusted his great hornglasses--he eyed me
superciliously from head to foot; then said, in a tone of derision:

"as you wish, friend countryman. but will you trade in pearl and
sapphire, or diamond pins and brooches, perhaps--or is it only for
broken victuals of my last night's supper?"

"keep thy victuals for thy lean and hungry lads! i will trade with
you in pearl and sapphire." and thereon, from under my moldy rags, i
brought a lordly ring that danced and sparkled in the clear sunlight
stealing through the mullioned windows of his booth, and threw
quivering rainbow hues upon the white walls of the little den, dazzling
the blinking, delighted old man in front of me. "how much for that?" i
asked, throwing it down in front of him.

it was a better gem than he had seen for many a day, and, having turned
it over loving and wistful, he whispered to me (for he thought i had
surely stolen it) one-sixteenth of its value! thereon i laughed at him,
and threw down my cap, and took the ring, and gave him such a lecture
on gems and jewels--all out of my old phrygian merchant knowledge--so
praised and belauded the shine and water of each single shining point
in that golden circlet, that presently i had sold it to him for near
its value!

then i bought a leather wallet and put the money in, and traded again
lower down the street with another ring. and then again at good
prices--for competition was close among these goldsmiths, and none
liked me to sell the beautiful things i showed them one by one to their
rivals--i sold two more.

"surely! surely! good youth," questioned one merchant to me, "these
trinkets were made for some master abbot's thumb, or some blessed
saint."

"and surely again, my friend," i answered, "you have just seen them
drawn from a layman's finger."

"well, well," he said, "i will give you your price," and then, as he
turned away to pack them, he muttered to himself, "a stout cudgel seems
a good profession nowadays! if it were not through fear yon flemish
rascal over the road might take the gem, i at least would never deal
with such an obvious footpad."

by this time i was rich, and my wallet purse hung low and heavy at
my girdle, so away i went to where some tailors lived, and accosted
the best of them. here the cross-legged sewers who sat on the sill
among shreds of hundred-colored stuffs and the bent, white-fingered
embroiderers stopped their work and gaped to hear the ragged, wayworn
loafer, whose broad shadow darkened their doorway, ask for silks and
satins, yepres and velvet. one youthful churl, under the master's
eyes, unbonneted, and in mock civility asked me whether i would
have my surtout of crimson or silver--whether my jupons should be
strung with seedling pearls, or just plain sewn with golden thread
and lace. he said, that harmless scoffer, he knew a fine pattern a
noble lord had lately worn, of minever and silver, which would very
neatly suit me--but i, disdainful, not putting my hand to my loaded
pouch as another might have done, only let the ragged homespun fall
from across my face, and, taking the cap from my raven hair and grim,
weather-beaten face, turned upon them.

the laughter died away in that little den as i did so, the
embroiderer's needle stuck halfway through its golden fabric, the
workers stared upon me open-mouthed. the cutter's shears shut with a
snap upon the rustling webs, and then forgot to open, while 'prentice
lads stood, all with yardwands in their hand, most strangely spellbound
by my presence. the conquest was complete without a word, and no one
moved, until presently down shuffled the master tailor from his dusky
corner, and, waving back his foolish boys, bowed low with sudden
reverence as he asked with many epithets of respect in how he might
serve me.

"thanks," i said, "my friend. what i need is only this--that you should
express upon me some of these tardy but courteous commendations.
translate me from these rags to the livery of gentility. express in
good stuffs upon me some of that ‘nobility' your quick perception has
now discovered--in brief, suit me at once as a not too fantastic knight
of your time is clad; and have no doubt about my paying." whereon i
quickened his willingness by a sight of my broad pieces.

well, they had just such vests and tunics and hose as i needed, and
these, according to the fashion, being laced behind and drawn in at
the middle by a loose sword-belt, fitted me without special making. my
vest was of the finest doeskin, scalloped round the edge, bound with
golden tissue, and worked all up the front with the same in leaves
and flowers. my hose were as green as rushes, and my shoes pointed
and upturned halfway to my knees. on my shoulders hung a loose cloak
of green velvet of the same hue as my hose, lined and puffed with the
finest grass-green satin that ever came in merchant bales from over
seas. over my right arm it was held by a gold-and-emerald brooch--a
"morse" that worthy clothier termed it--bigger than my palm, and this
tunic hung to my small-laced middle. my maunch-sleeves were lined by
ermine, and hung to my ankles a yard and more in length. on my head,
my cap, again, was all of ermine and velvet, bound with strings of
seed-pearls. that same kindly hosier got me a pretty playtime dagger
of gold and sapphire for my hip, and green-satin gloves, sewn thick
upon the back with golden threads. this, he said, was a fair and
knightly vestment, such as became a goodly soldier when he did not wear
his harness, but with naught about it of the courtly sumptuousness
which so hard and warlike-seeming a lord as i no doubt despised.

from hence i went by many a cobble pavement to where the noisy sound
of hammers and anvils filled the narrow streets. and mighty busy i
discovered the armor-smiths. there was such a riveting and hammering,
such a fitting and filing and brazing going on, that it seemed as
though every man in the town were about to don steel and leather. there
were long-legged pages in garb of rainbow hue hurrying about with
orders to the armorers or carrying home their masters' finished helms
or warlike gear; there were squires and men-at-arms idly watching at
the forge doors the pulsing hammers weld rivets and chains; and ever
and anon a man-at-arms would come pushing through these groups with
sheaves of broken arrows to be ground, or an armful of pikes to be
rehandled, casting them down upon the cumbered floor; or perhaps it
was a squire came along the way leading over the cobbles a stately
war-horse to the shoeing.

in truth, it was a sight to please a soldier's eyes, and right pleasant
was it to me to hear the proud neighing of the chargers, the laughing
and the talk, the busy whirr of grindstone on sword and axes, the
clangor of the hammers as the hot white spearheads went to the noisy
anvil, while forges beat in unison to the singing of the smiths! ah!
and i walked slowly down those streets, wondering and watching with
vast pleasure in the busy scene, though every now and then it came over
me how solitary i was--i, the one impassive in this turmoil, to whom
the very stake they prepared to fight for was unknown!

a little way off were the booths where stores of milan armor were
for sale. to them i went, and was shown piles and stacks of harness
such as never man saw before, all of steel and golden inlay, covering
every point of a warrior, and so rich and cumbersome that it was only
with great hesitation i submitted my free phrygian limbs to such a
steel casementing. but i was a gentleman now, whereof to witness
came my gorgeous apparel, backing the grim authority of my face,
and the bargaining was easy enough. skogula and mista! but those
swart, olive-skinned, hook-nosed jewish apprentices screwed me up and
braced me down into that suit of milan steel until i could scarcely
breathe--their black-eyed master all the time belauding the sit and
comfort of it.

"gads! sir," quoth he, "many's a hauberk i have seen laced on knightly
shoulders, but by the mail from the back of the gittite, who fell
in shochoh, i never saw a coat of links sit closer or truer than
that!" and then again, "there's a gorget for you, sir! why, if ahab
had but possessed such a one, as i am a miserable poor merchant and
your valor's humble servant, even the blessed arrows of israel would
have glanced off harmlessly from his ungodly body!" and the cunning,
sanctimonious old jew went fawning and smiling round while his helpers
pent me up in my glittering hide until i was steel-and-gold inlay from
head to heel.

"by abraham! noble sir, those greaves become your legs!--pull them in a
little more at the ankles, isaac!--and here's a tabard, sir, of crimson
velvet and emblazoned borderings a prince might gladly wear!"

then they put a helm upon me with a visor and beaver, through which
i frowned, as ill at ease as a young goshawk with his first hood,
and girded me with a broad belt chosen from many, and a good english
broadsword, the dagger "misericordia" at my other hip, and knightly
spurs (they gave me that rank without question) upon my heels, so that
i was completely armed at last, after the fantastic style of the time,
and fit to take my place again in the red ranks of my old profession.

i will not weary you with many details of the process whereby i adapted
myself to the times. from that armorer's shop i went--leaving my mail
to be a little altered--to a hostelry in the center square of the
town, and there i fed and rested. there, too, i chose a long-legged
squire from among those who hung about every street corner, and he
turned out a most accomplished knave. i never knew a villain who
could lie so sweetly in his master's service as that particolored,
curly-headed henchman. he fetched my armor back the next day, cheating
the armorer at one end of the errand and me at the other. he got me a
charger--filling the gray-stoned yard with capering palfreys that i
might make my choice--and over the price of my selection he cozened the
dealers and hoodwinked me. he was the most accomplished youth in his
station that ever thrust a vagrom leg into green-and-canary tights,
or put a cock's feather into a borrowed cap. he would sit among the
wallflowers on the inn-yard wall and pipe french ditties till every
lattice window round had its idle sewing-maid. he would swear, out in
the market-place, when he lost at dice or skittles, until the bronzed
troopers looking on blushed under their tawny hides at his supreme
expurlatives. there was not such a lad within the town walls for strut,
for brag, or bully, yet when he came in to render the service due to
me he ministered like a soft, white-fingered damsel. he combed my long
black hair, anointing and washing it with wondrous scents, whereof
he sold me phials at usurious interest; he whispered into my sullen,
unnoticing ear a constant stream of limpid, sparkling scandal; he
cleaned my armor till it shone like a brook in may time, and stole my
golden lace and a dozen of the sterling links from my dagger chain. he
knew the wittiest, most delicately licentious songs that ever were writ
by a minstrel, and he could cook such dishes as might have made a dying
anchorite sit up and feast.

strange, incomprehensible! that wayward youth went forth one day on his
own affairs, and met in the yard two sturdy loafers who spoke of me,
and calling me penniless, unknown, infamous--and french, perhaps--for
they doubted i was good english--whereon that gallant youth of mine
fell on them and fought them--there right under my window--and beat
them both, and flogged their dusty jackets all across the market-place
to the tune of their bellowings, and all this for his master's honor!
then, having done so much, he proceeded with his private errand, which
was to change, for his own advantage at a mean fleming's shop, those
pure golden spurs of mine, secreted in his bosom, into a pair of common
brass ones.

for five days i had lain in that town in magnificent idleness, and had
spent nearly all my rings and money, when, one day, as i sat moody
and alone by the porch of the inn drinking in the sun, my idle valor
rusting for service, and looking over the market square with its
weather-worn central fountain, its cobblestones mortared together with
green moss and quaint surroundings, there came cantering in and over
to my rest-house three goodly knights in complete armor with squires
behind them--their pennons fluttering in the wind, tall white feathers
streaming from their helms, and their swords and maces rattling at
the saddle bows to the merriest of tunes. they pulled up by the open
lattice, and, throwing their broad bridles to the ready squires, came
clattering up, dusty and thirsty, past where i lay, my inglorious
silken legs outstretched upon the window bench, and the sunlight all
ashine upon the gorgeous raiment that irked me so.

they were as jolly fellows as one could wish to see, and they tossed up
their beavers and called for wine and poured it down their throats with
a pleasure pleasant enough to watch. then--for they could not unlace
themselves--in came their lads and fell to upon them and unscrewed
and lifted off the great helms, and piece by piece all the glittering
armor, and piling it on the benches--the knights the while sighing with
relief as each plate and buckle was relaxed--and so they got them at
last down to their quilted vests, and then the gallants sat to table
and fell to laughing and talking until their dinner came.

from what i gathered, they were on their way to war, and war upon that
fair, fertile country yonder over the narrow seas. jove! how they did
revile the frenchman and drain their beakers to a merry meeting with
him, until ever as they chattered the feeling grew within me that here
was the chance i was waiting for--i would join them--and, since it was
the will of the incomprehensible, draw my sword once more in the cause
of this fair, many-mastered island.

nor was there long to wait for an excuse. they began talking of king
edward's forces presently, and how that every man who could spin a
sword or sit a war-horse was needed for the coming onset, and how more
especially leaders were wanting for the host gathering, so they said,
away by the coast. whereon at once i arose and went over, sitting down
at their table, and told them that i had some knowledge of war, and
though just then i lacked a quarrel i would willingly espouse their
cause if they would put me in the way of it.

in my interest and sympathy i had forgot they had not known i was so
close, and now the effect which my sudden appearance always had on
strangers made them all stare at me as though i were a being of another
world--as, indeed, i was--of many other worlds. and yet the comely,
stalwart, raven-tressed, silk-swathed fellow who sat there before
them at the white-scrubbed board, marking their fearful wonder with
regretful indifference, was solid and real, and presently the eldest of
them swallowed his surprise and spoke out courteously for all, saying
they would be glad enough to help my wishes, and then--warming with
good fellowship as the first effect of my entry wore off--he added
they were that afternoon bound for the rendezvous (as he termed it) at
a near castle; "and if i could wear harness as fitly as i could wear
silk, and had a squire and a horse," they would willingly take me along
with them. so it was settled, and in a great bumper they drank to me
and i to them, and thus informally was i admitted into the ranks of
english chivalry.

we ate and drank and laughed for an hour or two, and then settled with
our host and got into our armor. this to them was customary enough,
nor was it now so difficult a thing to me, for i had donned and doffed
my gorgeous steel casings, by way of practice, so often in seclusion
that, when it came to the actual test, assisted with the nimble fingers
of that varlet of mine, i was in panoply from head to heel, helmeted
and spurred, before the best of them. ah! and i was not so old yet but
that i could delight in what, after all, was a noble vestment! and as i
looked round upon my knightly comrades draining the last drops of their
flagons while their squires braced down their shining plates, and girt
their steel hips with noble brands, the while i knew in my heart that
if they were strong and stalwart i was stronger and more stalwart--that
if they carried proud hearts and faces shining there, under their
nodding plumes, of gentle birth and handsome soldierliness--no less
did i: knowing all this, i say, and feeling peer to these comely peers,
i had a flush of pride and contentment again in my strangely varied
lot. then the grooms brought round our gay-ribboned horses to the
cobbles in front, where, mounting, we presently set out, as goodly a
four as ever went clanking down a sunny market-place, while the maids
waved white handkerchiefs from the overhanging lattices and townsmen
and 'prentices uncapped them to our dancing pennons.

we rode some half-score miles through a fertile country toward the
west, now cantering over green undulations, and anon picking a way
through woodland coppices, where the checkered light played daintily
upon our polished furniture, and the spear-points rustling ever and
anon against the green boughs overhead.

"what of this good knight to whose keep we are going?" asked one of my
companions presently. "he is reputed rich, and, what is convenient in
these penurious times, blessed only with daughters."

"why!" responded the fellow at his elbow, who set no small store by
a head of curly chestnut hair and a handsome face below it, "if that
is so, in truth i am not at all sure but that i will respectfully
bespeak one of those fair maids. i am half convinced i was not born to
die on some scoundrel frenchman's rusty toasting-iron. 'tis a cursed
perilous expedition this of ours, and i never thought so highly of
the advantages of a peaceful and christian life as i have this last
day or two. now, which of these admirable maids dost thou think most
accessible, good delafosse?" he asked, turning to the horseman who
acted as our guide by right of previous knowledge here.

"well," quoth that youth, after a moment's hesitation, "i must frankly
tell you, ralph, that i doubt if there are any two maids within a score
of miles of us who have been tried so often by such as you and proved
more intractable. the knight, their father, is a rough old fellow, as
rich as though he were an abbot, hale and frank with every one. you
may come or go about his halls, and (for they have no mother) lay what
siege you like to his girls, nor will he say a word. so far so well,
and many a pretty gallant asks no better opportunity. but, because you
begin thus propitious, it does not follow either fair citadel is yours!
no! these virgin walls have stood unmoved a hundred assaults, and as
much escalading as only a country swarming with poor desperate youths
can any way explain."

"st. denis!" exclaimed the other, "all this but fans the spark of my
desire."

"oh, desire by all means. if wishes would bring down well-lined
maidenhoods, those were a mighty scarce commodity. but, soberly, does
thy comprehensive valor intend to siege both these heiresses at once,
or will one of them suffice?"

"one, gentle delafosse, and, when my exulting pennon flutters
triumphant from that captured turret, i will in gratitude help thee to
mount the other. difference them, beguile this all too tedious way with
an account of their peculiar graces. which maid dost thou think i might
the most aptly sue?"

"well, you may try, of course, but remember i hold out no hope, neither
of the elder nor the younger. that one, the first, is as magnificent
a shrew as ever laughed an honest lover to scorn. she is as black and
comely as any daughter of zion. 'tis to her near every knight yields
at first glance; but--gads!--it does them little good! she has a heart
like the nether millstone; and, as for pride, she is prouder than
lucifer! i know not what game it may be this swart circe sees upon the
skyline--some say 'tis even for that bold boy the young prince himself,
now gone with his father to france, she waits; and some others say she
will look no lower than a duke backed by the wealth of the grand soldan
himself. but whoever it be, he has not yet come."

"by the bones of st. thomas à becket," the young knight laughed, "i
have a mind that that knight and i may cross the drawbridge together!
canst tell me, out of good comradeship, any weak place in this damsel's
harness?"

"there is none i know of. she is proof at every point. indeed, i am
nigh reluctant to let one like you, whose heart has ripened in the
sun of experience so much faster than his head, engage upon such a
dangerous venture. they say one gallant was so stung by the calm scorn
with which she mocked his offer that he went home and hung himself to
a cellar beam; and another, blind in desperate love, leaped from her
father's walls, and fell in the courtyard, a horrid, shapeless mass!
young de vipon, as you know, stabbed himself at her feet, and 'tis told
the maid's wrath was all because his spurting heart's-blood soiled
her wimple a day before it was due to go to wash! how thrives thy
inclination?"

"oh! well enough: 'twould take more than this to spoil my appetite!
but, nevertheless, let us hear something of the other sister. this
elder is obviously a proud minx, who has set her heart on lordly game,
and will not marry because her suitors seem too mean. how is it with
the other girl?"

"why," said delafosse, "it is even more hopeless with her. she will not
marry, for the cold sufficient reason that her suitors be all men!"

"a most abominable offense."

"ah! so she thinks it. such a tender, shy and modest maid there is not
in the boast of the county. while the elder will hear you out, arms
crossed on pulseless bosom, cold, disdainful eyes fixed with haughty
stare to yours, the other will not stop to listen--no, not so much
as to the first inkling of your passion! breathe so little as half a
sigh, or tint your speech with a rosy glint of dawning love, and she
is away, lighter than thistledown on the upland breeze. i know of
but two men--loose, worldly fellows both of them--who cornered her,
and they came from her presence looking so crestfallen, so abashed
at their hopes, so melancholy to think on their gross manliness as
it had appeared against the white celibacy of that maid, that even
some previous suitors sorrowed for them. this is, i think, the safer
venture, but even the least hopeful."

"is the maid all fallow like that? has she no human faults to set
against so much sterile virtue?"

"of her faults i cannot speak, but you must not hold her altogether
insipid and shallow. she is less approachable than her sister, and
contemns and fears our kind, yet she is straight and tall in person,
and, i have heard from a foster-brother of hers, can sit a fiery
charger, new from stall, like a groom or horse boy, she is the best
shot with a crossbow of any on the castle green, and in the women's
hall as merry a romp, as ready for fun or mischief, as any village girl
that ever kept a twilight tryst on a saturday evening."

"gads! a most pleasant description. i will keep tryst with this one for
a certainty, not only saturdays, but six other days out of the week.
the black jade may wait for her princeling for a hundred years as far
as i am concerned. how far is it to the castle?--i am hot impatience
itself!"

"nor need your patience cool! look!" said delafosse, and as he spoke
we turned a bend in the woodland road, and there, a mile before us,
flashing back the level sun from towers and walls that seemed of
burnished copper, was the noble pile we sought.

certes! when we came up to it, it was a fine place indeed, cunningly
built with fosses round about, long barbican walls within them,
turreted and towered, and below these again were other walls so shrewd
designed for defense as to move any soldier heart with wonder and
delight. but if the walls did pleasure me, the great keep within,
towering high into the sky with endless buttresses, and towers, and
casements, grim, massive, and stately, rearing its proud circumference,
embattled and serrated far beyond the reach of rude assault or
desperate onset, filled me with pride and awe. i scarce could take
my eyes from those red walls shining so molten in the setting sun,
yet round about the country lay very fair to look at. all beyond
that noble pile the land dropped away--on two sides by sheer cliffs
to the shining river underneath--and on the others in gentle, grassy
undulations, dotted with great trees, whereunder lay, encamped by tent
and watchfire, the rear of king edward's army, and then on again into
the pleasant distance that lay stretched away in hill and valley toward
the yellow west.

all over that wide campaign were scattered the villages of serfs and
vassals who grew corn for the lordly owner in peace-time, and followed
his banner in battle. and in that knightly stronghold up above there
were, i found when i came to know it better, many kinsmen and women who
sheltered under my lord's liberality. dowagers dwelt in the wings, and
young squires of good name--a jolly, noisy, unruly crew--harbored down
in the great vaulted chambers by the sally-port. there were kinsmen
of the left-hand degree in the warder's lodge by the gates, and poor
wearers of the same noble escutcheon up among the jackdaws and breezes
of the highest battlements. and so generous was the knight's bounty,
so ample the sweep of his castellated walls and labyrinthine the mazes
of the palace keep they encircled, so abundant the income of his
tithes and tenure, dues and fees, that all these folk found living and
harborage with him; and not only did it not irk that lord, but only to
his steward and hall porter was it known how many guests there were,
or when a man came or went, or how many hundred horses stood in the
stalls, or how many score of vassals fed in the great kitchen.

on sundays, after mass, the smooth green in the center of the castle
would be thronged with men and maids in all their finery; while the
quintains spun merrily under the mock onsets of the young knights,
and dame and gallant trode the stony battlements, and down among the
wide shadow of the cedar-trees on the slope ('twas a crusader who
brought the saplings from palestine) vassal and yeoman idled and made
love or frolicked with their merry little ones. over all that gallant
show my lord's great blazon snapped and flaunted in the wind upon the
highest donjon; and in the halls beneath the lords and ladies sat
in the deep-seated windows, and laughed and sang and jested in the
mullion-tinted sunshine with all the courtly extravagance of their
brilliant day.

ah! by old isis! at that time the world, it seemed to me, was less
complex, and the rules of life were simpler. kingcraft had found its
mold and fashion in the courageous edward, and the first duty of
a noble was then nobility: the knights swore by their untarnished
chivalry, and the vassals by their loyalty. yes! and it was priestly
then to fear god and hell, and every woman was, or would be, lovely! so
ran the simple creed of those who sang or taught, while nearly every
one believed them.

but you who live in a time when there is no belief but that of
incredulence, when the creative skill and forethought of the great
primeval cause is open to the criticism and cavil of every base human
atom it has brought about--you know better--you know how vain their
dream was, how foolish their fidelity, how simple their simplicity,
how contemptible their courage, and how mean by the side of your love
of mediocrity their worship of ideals and heroes! by the bright theban
flames to which my fathers swore! by the grim shadow of osiris which
dogged the track of my old phœnician bark! i was soon more english than
any of them.

but while i thus tell you the thoughts that came of experience, i keep
you waiting at the castle-gate. they admitted us by drawbridge and
portcullised arch into the center space, and there we dismounted. then
down the steps, to greet guests of such good degree, came the gallant,
grizzled old lord himself in his quilted under-armor vest. we made
obeisance, and in a few words the host very courteously welcomed his
guests, leading us in state (after we had given our helmets to the
pages at the door) into the great hall of his castle, where we found a
throng of ladies and gallants in every variety of dress filling those
lofty walls with life and color.

in truth, it was a noble hall, the walls bedecked with antlers or
spoils of woodcraft, with heads and horns and bows and bills, and
tapestry; and the ceiling wonderfully wrought with carved beams as far
down that ample corridor as one could see. the floor of oak was dark
with wear, yet as smooth and reflective to many-colored petticoats and
rainbow-tinted shoes as the parian marble of some fair roman villa.
and on the other side there were fifty windows deep-set in the wall,
with gay stainings on them of parable and escutcheon; while on the
benches, fingering ribboned mandolins, whispering gentle murmurs under
the tinseled lawn of fair ladies' kerchiefs, or sauntering to and fro
across the great chamber's ample length, were all these good and gentle
folk, bedecked and tasseled and ribboned in a way that made that
changing scene a very fairy show of color.

strange, indeed, was it for me to walk among the glittering throng,
all prattling that merry medley they called their native english, and
to remember all i could remember, to recall briton, roman, norseman,
norman, saxon, and to know each and all of those varied peoples were
gone--gone forever--gone beyond a hope or chance of finding--and yet,
again, to know that each and every one of those nations, whose strong
life in turn had given color to my life, was here--here before me,
consummated in this people--oh, 'twas strange, and almost past belief!
and ever as i went among them in fairer silks and ermines than any, yet
underneath that rustling show i laughed to know that i was nothing but
the old phœnician merchant, nothing but electra's petted paramour, the
strong, unruly saxon thane!

and if i thought thus of them, in sooth, they thought no less strangely
of me! ever, as my good host led me here and there from group to group,
the laughter died away on cherry lips, and minstrel fingers went all
a-wandering down their music strings as one and all broke off in mid
pleasure to stare in mute perplexity and wonder at me. from group to
group we went, my host at each making me known to many a glittering
lord and lady, and to each of those courtly presences i made in return
that good saxon bow, which subsequently i found instable fashion had
made exceeding rustic.

presently in this way we came to a gay knot of men collected round
two fair women, the one of them seated in a great velvet chair,
holding court as i could guess by word and action over the bright
constellations that played about her, the other within the circle, yet
not of it, standing a little apart and turned from us as we approached.
alianora, the first of these noble damsels, was the elder daughter
of the master of the house, and the second, isobel, was his younger
child. the first of these was a queen of beauty, and from that first
moment when i stood in front of her, and came under the cold, proud
shine of those black eyes, i loved her! jove! i felt the hot fire of
love leap through my veins on the instant as i bowed me there at her
footstool and forgot everything else for the moment, merging all the
world against the inaccessible heart of that beautiful girl. indeed,
she was one who might well play the queen among men. her hair was black
as night, and, after the fashion of the time, worked up to either side
of her head into a golden filigree crown, beaded with shining pearls,
extraordinary regal. black were her eyes as any sloe, and her smooth,
calm face was wonderful and goddess-like in the perfect outline and
color. never a blush of shame or fear, never a sign of inward feeling,
stirred that haughty damsel's mood. by venus! i wonder why we loved
her so. to whisper gentle things into her ear was but like dropping
a stone into some deep well--the ripples on the dark, sullen water
were not more cold, silent, intangible than her responsive smile.
she was too proud even to frown, that disdainful english peeress,
but, instead, at slight or negligence she would turn those unwavering
eyes of hers upon the luckless wight and look upon him so that there
was not a knight, though of twenty fights, there was not a gallant,
though never so experienced in gentle tourney with ladies' eyes, who
durst meet them. to this maid i knelt--and rose in love against all my
better instinct--wildly, recklessly enamored of her shining circean
queenliness--ah! so enthralled was i by the black alianora that my
host had to pluck me by the sleeve ere he whispered to me, "another
daughter, sir stranger! divide your homage," and he led me to the
younger girl.

now, if the elder sister had won me at first sight, my feelings
were still more wonderful to the other. if the elder had the placid
sovereignty of the evening star, isobel was like the planet of the
morning. from head to heel she was in white. upon her forehead her fair
brown hair was strained back under a coverchief and wimple as colorless
as the hawthorn flowers. this same fair linen, in the newest fashion of
demurity, came down her cheeks and under her chin, framing her face in
oval, in pretty mockery of the steel coif of an armed knight. her dress
below was of the whitest, softest stuff, with long, hanging sleeves, a
wondrous slender middle drawn in by a silk and silver cestus belt made
like a warrior's sword-wear, and a skirt that descended in pretty folds
to her feet and lay atwining about them in comely ampleness. she was as
supple as a willow wand, and tall and straight, and her face--when in a
moment she turned it on me--was wondrous pleasant to look at--the very
opposite of her sister's--all pink and white, and honestly ashine with
demure fun and merriment, the which constantly twinkled in her downcast
eyes, and kept the pretty corners of her mouth a-twitching with covert,
ill-suppressed, unruly smiles. a fair and tender young girl indeed,
made for love and gentleness!

unhappy isobel!--luckless victim of an accursed fate! wretched,
perverse phœnician! ill-omened alianora! between us three sprang up two
fatal passions. read on, and you shall see.

chapter xi

now, when that fair young english girl, at her father's voice, turned
to acknowledge my presence--thinking it was some other new knight of
the many who came there every hour, she lifted her eyes to mine--and
then, all on a sudden, without rhyme or reason, she started back and
blanched whiter than her own wimple, and then flushed again, equally
unaccountably, and fell a-trembling and staring at me in a wondrous
fashion. she came a step forward, as though she would greet some
long-looked-for friend, and then withdrew--and half held out her hand,
and took it back, the while the color came and went upon her cheeks in
quick flushes, and, stirred by some strange emotion, her bosom rose
and fell under the golden cestus and the lawn with the stress of her
feelings. the sudden storm, however invoked, shook that sweet fabric
most mightily. there, in that very minute, it seemed--there, in that
merry, careless place in sight of me, but a gaudy gallant a little more
thoughtful-looking, perhaps, than those she often saw, yet, all the
same, naught but a stranger gallant, unknown and nameless to her--moved
by some affinity within us, just as the alchemist's magic touch
converts between two breaths one elixir in his crucibles to another,
so, before my eyes, i saw in that fair girl's pallid face love flush
through her veins and light her heart and eyes with a responding blush.

and i--i the unhappy, i the sorrow bestower, as i saw her first, what
of all things in this wide world should i think of--what should leap up
in my mind as i perked my gilded scabbard and bowed low to the polished
floor in my glittering plantagenet finery--what vision should come to
me in that latter-day hall, among those mandolin-fingering courtiers,
before that costly raimented maiden, the fair heiress of a thousand
years of care and gentle living, that girl leaning frightened and shy
upon the arm of her strong father like a soft white mist-cloud in the
shadow of a mountain--what thought, what idea, but a swift revision, of
blodwen, my wild, ruddy, untutored british wife!

all those gaudy butterflies of the new day, that stately home and that
fair flower herself, shrank into nothing; and as the white lightning
leaps through the dull void of midnight, and shows for one dazzling
second some long-remembered country, ashine in every leaf and detail,
to the startled pilgrim, and then is gone with all the ghostly mirage
of its passage, so in that surprising moment, so full of import,
blodwen rose to my mind against all reason and likelihood--blodwen
the briton, the ruddy-haired--blodwen radiant with her gentle
motherhood--blodwen who could scream so fiercely to her clansmen in the
forefront of conflict, and drive her bloody chariot through the red mud
of battle with wounded foemen writhing under her remorseless wheels
more blithely than a latter-day maid would trip through the spangled
meadow grass of springtime--blodwen rose before me!

oh! 'twas wild, 'twas foolish, past explaining, nonsense: and, angry
with myself and that white maid who stood and hung her head before me,
i stroked my hand across my face to rid me of the fancy, and, gathering
myself together, made my bow, murmuring something fiercely civil, and
turned my back upon her to seek another group.

yes; but if you think i conquered that fancy, you are wrong. for days
and days it haunted me, even though i laughed it to scorn, and, what
made the matter more difficult, more perplexing, was that i had not
guessed in error--the unhappy isobel had loved me from first sight,
and, against every precedent her nature would have warranted, grew
daily deeper in the toils. and i, who never yet had turned from the
eyes of suppliant maid, watched her color shift and fly as i came or
went, and strode gloomy, unmindful, through all her pretty artifices of
maiden tenderness, burning the meanwhile with love for her disdainful
sister. it was a strange medley, and in one phase or another pursued
me all the time i was in that noble keep. when i was not wooing i was
being wooed. alas! and all the coldness i got from that black-browed
lady with the goddess carriage and the faultless skin i passed on to
the poor, enamored girl who dogged my idle footsteps for a word.

thus, on one day we had a tournament. all round the great castle, under
the oaks, were pitched the tents of the troopers, while the pennons
and bannerets of knights and barons, as we saw them from the turret
top, shone in the sunlight like a field of flowers. the soldier-yeomen
had their sports and contests on the greensward, and we went down to
watch them. thor! but i never saw such bronzed and stalwart fellows, or
witnessed anything like the truth and straightness of those stinging
flights of shafts the archers sent against their butts! then the next
day, following the sports of the common people, in the tiltyard inside
the barbican, we held a tourney, a mock battle and a breaking of
spears, a very gorgeous show indeed, and near as exciting as an honest
mêlée itself.

so tuneful in my ears proved the shivering of lances and the clatter
of swords on the steel panoply of the knights, that, though at first
i held aloof, stern and gloomy with my futile passion, yet presently
i itched to take a spear, and, since those sparkling riders liked the
fun so much, to let them try whether my right hand had lost the cunning
it learned before their fathers were conceived. and as i thought so,
standing among the chief ones in that brilliant tourney ring, up came
the white rose and tempted me to break a lance, and sighed so softly
and brushed against me with her scented draperies, and tried with
feeble self-command to meet my eyes and could not, and was so obviously
wishful that i should ride a course or two, and so prettily in love,
that i was near relenting of my coldness.

i did unbend so much as to consent to mount. a page fetched my armor
and my mighty black charger draped in crimson-blazoned velvet and
ribboned from head to tail, and then i went to the rear of the lists
and put on the steel.

"thanks, good squire!" i said to the youth who thrust my pointed toes
into the stirrups when i was on my horse. "now give me up my gauntlets
and post me in my principles."

"fie, sir, not to know," quoth he, "the worship of weapons and the
honor of fair ladies!"

"thanks. that is not difficult to remember; and as to my practice?"

"ah! there you confuse him," put in a jester standing by. "no good
knight likes to be bound too closely as to that."

as i rode round the lists, a white hand from under the sister's
daïs--to whom belonging i well could guess--threw me a flower, the
which fell under my sleek charger's hoofs and was stamped into the
trodden mold. and then the trumpet sounded. "avant!" called the
glittering marshal--and we met in mid career.

seven strong knights did i jerk from their high-peaked saddles that
morning, and won a lady's golden head-ring, and rode round about the
circus with it on my lance-point. when i came under where isobel sat,
i saw her fair cheeks redder than my ribbons with maiden expectation;
but, as i passed without a sign, they grew whiter than her lawn. and
then i reined up and deposited that circlet at the footstool of her
sister. the proud, cold maid accepted the homage as was her duty, but
scarcely deigned to lower her eyes to the level of my helmet-plumes
while her father put it on her forehead.

a merry time we had in that courtly place waiting for the signal to
start; and much did i learn and note--soon the favorite gallant in that
goodly company, the acknowledged strongest spearman in the lists, the
best teller of strange stories by an evening fire! but never an inch of
way could i make with the impenetrable girl on whom my wayward heart
was set, while the other--the younger--made her sweet self the pointing
stock of high and low, she was so blindly, so obviously in love.

one day it came to a climax. we met by chance in a glade of black
shadows among the cedar branches, i and that damsel in white, and,
finding i would not woo her, she set to work and wooed me--so sweet, so
strong, so passionate, that to this day i cannot think how i withstood
it. yes, and that fair, slim maid, renowned through all the district
for her gentle reticence, when i would not answer love with love, and
glance for glance, fired up with white-hot passion, threw hesitance to
the wind, and besought and knelt to me, and asked no more than to be
my slave, so sweet, so reckless in her passion, that it was not the
high-born english lady who knelt there, but rather it seemed to me my
dear, fiery, untutored british princess! fool i was not to see it then,
witless after so much not to guess the tameless spirit, the intruder
soul that poor girl at my feet held unwitting in her bosom!

she came to me, as i have said, all in a gust of feeling unlike
herself, and, when i would not say that which she longed to hear, she
wrung her hands, and then down she came upon her knees and clipped me
round my jeweled belt and confessed her love for me in such a headlong
rush of tearful eloquence i durst not write it.

"lady," i said, lifting the supple girl to her feet. "i grieve, but it
is useless. forget! forgive! i cannot answer as you would."

"ah, but," she answered, rushing again to the onset, sighing as now
the hot, strange love that burned within her, and now her sweet native
spirit strove for mastery--("surely, i think, i am possessed), i
will not take ‘no' for an answer. i am consumed (oh! fie to say it)
for thee. i am not first in thy dear affection--why, then, i will
be second. not second! then i will be the hundredth from thy heart!
my light, my life and fate, i cannot live without thee. oh! as you
were born by your mother's consummated love, as thou hast ever felt
compunction for a white-cheeked maid, have pity on me! i tell thee i
will follow thee to the ends of the earth (lord! how my tongue runs
on!). for one moiety of that affection perhaps a happier woman has i
will serve thee through life. thou hast no wife, 'tis said, to hinder;
thou art a soldier, and a score of them, ere i was touched with this
strange infection, have sued hopeless for but a chance of that which
is proffered thee so freely. truth! they have told me i was fair and
tall, with a complexion that ridiculed the water-lilies on the moat,
and hair, one said, was like ripe corn with a harvest sun upon it (it
makes me blush"--i heard her whisper to herself--"to apprise myself
like this), and yet you stand there averse and sullen, with eyes turned
from me, and deaf ears! am i a sight so dreadful to you?"

"maid!" i cried, shutting out her suppliant beauty from my
heart--overfull, as i thought it, of that other one, her sister--"no
man could look at you and not be moved. the wayward immortals have
given you more sweetness than near any other woman i ever saw--‘a sight
so dreadful to me?'--why, you are fairer than an early morning in may
when the new sun gets up over the wet-flowered hawthorns! and for
this very reason, for pity on us both, stand up, and dry your tears!
believe me, dear maid, where i go you cannot come. you tread the rough
soldier's path! why, those pretty velvet buskins would wear out in the
first march. and turn those dainty hands to the rough craft of war, to
scouring harness and grooming chargers--oh! that were miserable indeed;
those cherry lips are worse suited than you know for the chance fare of
camp and watchfire, and those round arms would soon find a sword was
heavier than a bodkin--there, again forget, forgive--and, perhaps, when
i come back"

but why should i further follow that sad love-scene under the
broad-spreading cedars? let it be sufficient for you that i soothed her
as well as might be and stanched her tears and modified my coolness,
taking her pretty hands and whispering to as dainty and greedy an
ear as ever was opened to hear, perhaps, a little more of lover
friendliness than i truly meant, and so we parted.

*       *       *       *       *

now see the shield turned. that very afternoon did the other sister
unbend a point with cruel suavity, and set me joyous by promising
to meet me at nightfall, whereat, as you will readily understand,
every other event of the day faded into nothingness. at the appointed
hour, just as the white mist floated in thin fine wisps from the
shadowed moat on the eastward of the castle wall and the red setting
sun was throwing the strong black shadows of cedar branches upon the
copper-gleaming windows and walls of the side that faced him, i rose,
and, making some jesting excuse, slipped away from my noisy comrades
in the hall into the shadows of the corridors. yes! and, though you
may smile, he who thought this phœnician had plumbed the well of
mortal love to the very depth, had learned all there was to learn,
and left nothing that could stir him so much as a heart-beat in this
fair field of adventure, was now tripping through the ruddy and black
dust, anxious and alert, his pulses beating a quicker measure than his
feet, the native boldness of his nature all overlaid with new-born
diffidence, fingering his silken points as he went, and conning
pretty speeches, now hoping in his lover hesitance the tryst would
not be kept, and then anon spurning himself for being so laggard and
faint-hearted, and thus progressing in moods and minds as many as the
gentle shadows checkering his path from many an oriel window and many a
fluted casement, he came at length within sight of the deep-set window
looking down over the pale-shining water and the heavy woods beyond,
where his own love-tale was to be told.

and there as i plucked back the last tapestry that barred my passage
and stood still for a moment on the threshold--there before me sitting
on the tressels under the mullions in the twilight, was the figure of
my fair and haughty english girl.

she had her face turned away from the evening glow, her ample white
cap, peaked and laced with gold on either crescent point, further threw
into shadow the features i knew so well, while the fine shapely hands
lay hidden in the folds of the ample dress which shone and glimmered
in the dusk against the oak panelings of that ancient lobby in misty
uncertainty. gentle dame! my heart bounded with expectant triumph to
see how pensive and downcast was her look--how still she sat and how,
methought, the white linen and the golden ceinture above her heart rose
and fell even in that silent place with the tumult of maidenly passion
within. my heart opened to her, i say, as though i were an enamored
shepherd about to pour a brand-new virgin love into the frightened
ears of some timid country maid, and within my veins, as the heavy
arras fell from my hands behind me, there surged up the molten stream
of eastern love! i waited neither to see nor hear else, but strode
swiftly over the floor and cast myself down there at her feet upon one
knee--gods! how it makes me smart to think of it!--i who had never bent
a knee before in supplication to earth or heaven, and poured out before
her the offering of my passion. hot and swiftly i wooed her, saying i
scarce know what, loosening my heart before that silent shrine, laying
bare the keen, strong throb of life and yearning that pulsed within me,
persuading, entreating, cajoling, until both breath and fancy failed.
and never under all that stream of love had the damsel given one sign,
one single indication of existence.

then on i went again, deeming the maid held herself not yet wooed
enough, disporting myself before her, and pleading the simplicity of my
love, saying how that, if it brought no great riches with it, yet was
it the treasure of a truthful heart. did she sigh to widen her father's
broad lands? i swore by osiris i would do it for her love better than
any petty lordling could. did she desire to shine, honored above all
women, where spears were broken or feasts were spread? think of yon
littered lists, i cried, and told her there was not a champion in all
the world i feared--none who should not come humbled to her footstool;
while, as for honor and recognition--jove! i would pluck them from the
king himself, even as i had plucked them from his betters. yet never a
sign that fair girl gave.

full of wonder and surprise, i waited for a moment for some sign
or show, if not of answering fire, at least of reason; and then,
as i checked in full course my passionate pleadings, that wretched
thing before me burst, not into the tears i expected of maidenly
capitulation, nor into the proud anger of offended virgins, but into
a silly, plebeian simper, which began in ludicrous smothered merriment
under the folds of the lawn she held across her face, and ended amid
what appeared contending feelings in a rustic outburst of sobs and
exclamations.

i was on my feet in an instant, all my wild love-making dammed back
upon my heart by suspicion and surprise, and as i frowned fiercely
at that dim-seen form under the distorting shadow of the windows, it
rose--to nothing like alianora's height--and stepped out where the
evening light better illumined us. and there that poor traitress tore
off in anger and remorse the lace and linen of a well-born english
maiden, and stood revealed before me the humblest, the meanest-seeming,
and the most despised kitchen wench of any that served in that baronial
hall!

you will guess what my feelings were as this indignity i had been put
to rushed upon me, how in my wounded pride i crossed my arms savagely
upon my breast, and turned away from that poor, simpering, rustic fool,
and clenched my teeth, and swore fierce oaths against that cruel girl
who, in her pride and insolence, had played me this sorry trick. wild
and bitter were the gusts of passion that swept through my heart, and
all the more unruly since it was by and for a woman i had fallen, and
there was none for me to take vengeance on.

in a few minutes i turned to the wretched tool of a vixen mistress.
"hast any explanation of this?" i sternly asked, pointing to the
disordered finery that lay glimmering upon the floor.

the unhappy kitchenmaid nodded behind her tears and the thick red hands
wherewith she was streaking two wet, round cheeks with alternate hues
of grief and dinginess, and put a hand into her bosom and handed me
a folded missive. i tore it open and read, in prettily scrawled old
norman french, that cruel message:

_this is to tell that nameless knight who has nothing to
distinguish him but presumption, that although the daughter
of an english peer must ever treat his suit with the
contempt it deserved, yet will she go so far as to select
him from among her father's vassals one to whom she thinks
he might very fitly unburden his soul of its load of "love
and fealty."_

such was the missive, one surely penned by as ungentle a hand as ever
ministered to a woman's heart. i tore it into a hundred fragments, and
then grimly pointed my traducer to the narrow wicket in the remote wall
leading down by a hundred stony stairs to the scullion places whence
she had come. she turned and went a little way toward it, then came
sobbing back, and burst out into grief anew, and "alas! alas! sir,"
she cried, "this is the very worst task that ever i was put to! shame
upon lady alianora, and double shame upon me for doing her behests.
i am sorry, sir! indeed i am! until you began that wonderful tale i
thought 'twas but a merry game; but, oh, sir! to see you there upon
your knee, to see your eyes burning in the dark with true love for my
false mistress--why, sir, it would have drawn tears from the hardest
stone in the mill down yonder. and ever as your talk went on just now,
i kept saying to myself, sure! but it must be a big heart which works
a tongue like that; and when you had done, sir, ah! before you were
halfway through, though i could not stop you, yet i loathed my errand.
i am sorry, sir, indeed i am! i cannot go until i be forgiven!"

"there, there, silly girl," i said, my wrath quenched by her red eyes
and humble amendment, "you are fully absolved."

she kissed my hands and dried her eyes, and swept together, with woman
swiftness, the tattered things in which she had masqueraded, and then,
as she was about to leave, i called her back.

"stay one moment, damsel! how much had you for thus betraying me?"

"two zequins, sir," she answered with simplicity.

"why, then, here's three others to say naught about this evening's
doings in the servants' hall. you understand? there, go! and no more
tears or thanks," and, as the curtain fell upon her, i could not help
muttering to myself, "what! two zequins to undo you, phra, and three
to mend it? why, phœnician, thou hast not been so cheap for thirteen
hundred years!"

chapter xii

grim and angry, all that night i chewed the bitter cud of my rejection,
and before the new day was an hour old determined life was no longer
worth the living in that place. i determined to leave those walls at
once, to leave all my songs unsung, my trysts unkept, to leave all my
jolly comrades, the tiltyards and banquets. but i could not do this so
secret as i would. the very paying off of my score down in the buttery,
the dismissing of my attendants, each with largess, the seriousness i
could not but give to my morning salutation of some of those i should
never see again, betrayed me. and thus a whisper, first down in the
vaulted guard-room, and then a rumor, and anon a widening murmur the
news was spread, until surely the very jackdaws on the battlements were
saying to themselves, "phra is going! phra!--phra is going!"

yes! and the tidings spread to that fair floor of a hundred corridors,
where the norman-arched windows looked down four score feet upon the
river winding amid its shining morning meadows, bringing a sigh to more
than one silken pillow. it reached the unhappy, red-eyed isobel, and
presently she tripped down the twining stone staircase, the loose folds
of her skirt thrown over her arm to free her pretty feet, and in her
hand a scrap of writing, a "cartel" she called it, seeming newly opened.

she came to the sunny empty corridor where i stood alone, and touched
me on the arm as i watched from a lattice my charger being armed and
saddled in the courtyard underneath, and when i turned held out her
hand to me in frank and simple fashion. how could i refuse the proffer
of so fair a friendship? and, pulling my velvet cap from my head, i
put her white fingers to my lips. and was it true, she asked with a
sigh, i was really going that morning, and so suddenly? only too true,
i answered, and, saving her presence, not so sudden as my inclination
prompted. much i saw she wished to question the why and wherefore, but
of this, as of nothing touching her stern sister, would i tell her.

so presently she come to her point, and, fingering that scroll she had,
very downcast and blushful, said: "you are a good knight, sir stranger,
and strong and experienced in arms."

"your ladyship's description wakes my ambition to deserve your words."

"and generous, i have noticed, and as indulgent to page and squire of
tender years as you are the contrary to stronger folk."

"and if this were so, madam," i asked, "what then?"

"oh! only," she said, wondrous shy and frightened, "that i have here a
cartel from a friend of mine, a youth of noble family, who has heard
of thee, and would go to the wars in your company--as your comrade, i
mean: that is, if you would take him."

"why, damsel, the wars are free to every one; but i am in no mood just
now to tutor a young gallant in slitting frenchmen's throats!"

"but this one, sir, very particularly wishes to travel with you, of
whose prowess he is so convinced. he has, alas! quarreled with those at
whose side he should most naturally ride--he will be no trouble; for my
sake you must take him. and," said the cunning girl, standing on tiptoe
to be the nearer to my ear, "he is rich, though friendless by a rash
love--he will gladly see to both your horses and disburse your passage
over to france, even for the honor of remembering that he did it."

now, this touched me very nearly. one by one my rings had gone, and
that morning, after paying scores and largess, in truth i had found
my wallet completely empty once again! if this youth had money, even
though it were but sufficient to buy corn for our chargers on the way,
and pay the ferry over to yonder fair field of adventure, why, there
was no denying he would be a very convenient traveling companion,
and it would go hard but that i could teach him something in return.
thinking this, i lifted my eyes, and found those of isobel watching the
workings of my face with pretty cunning.

"in truth, maid, if thy friend has so much gold as would safely land us
with king edward in flanders, why, i must confess that just at present
that does greatly commend him to me. what sort of a man is he?"

this question seemed to overwhelm the lady, who blushed and hung her
head like a poppy that has stood a week's drought.

"in truth, sir," she murmured, "i do not know."

"not know! why, but you said he was your friend."

"oh! so i did. and, now i come to think of it, he is a tall
youth--about my size and make."

"gads! but he will be a shapely, if somewhat sapling gallant," i
laughed, letting my eye roam over the supple maiden figure before me.

"but though he be so slim," the girl hastened to add, as if she feared
she had been indiscreet, "you will find the youth a rare good horseman,
and clever in many things. he can cook (if thou art ever belated) like
a frenchman, and can read missals to thee, and write like a monk--thy
comrade, sir knight, will be one in a thousand--he can sing like a
mavis on a fir-top."

"i like not these singing knights, fair maid: their verses are both too
smooth for soldier ears, and too licentious for maidens'."

"ah! but my friend," quoth isobel, with a blush, "never sang an
ungentle song in his life; you will find him a most civil, most
simple-spoken companion."

"well, then, i will have him--no doubt we shall grow as close together
as boon companions should."

"would that you might grow so close together as i could wish!" said the
english girl, with a sigh i did not understand.

"and now, how am i to know this friend," i asked, "this slim and gentle
youth? what is his name, and what his face?"

"i had near forgotten that; and it was like a woman, for they say they
ever keep the most important matter to the last! this boy, for good
reasons that i know but may not mention, has sworn a vow, after the
fashion of the chivalry he delights in, not to show his face, not to
wear his honorable name, until some happier times shall come for him.
he is in love--like many another--and does conceive his heart to be
most desperately consumed thereby. wherefore he has taken the name of
flamaucœur, and bears upon his shield a device to that effect. this
alone will point him out to you, over and above the dropped visor,
which no earthly power will make him lift until this war and quest
of his be over. but you will know him, i feel in my heart, without
consideration. sir knight, you will know this youth when you meet him,
something in my innermost heart does tell me, even as i should know one
that i loved or that loved me behind twenty thicknesses of steel. and
now, good-by until we meet again!"

the fair maid gave me her hand as though to part, and then hesitated a
moment. presently she mustered up courage and said:

"thou bear'st me no ill-will for yonder wild meeting of ours?"

"maiden, it is forgotten!"

"well, let it be so. i do not know what possessed me. i was hurried
down the stream of feeling like a leaf on a tide. 'twas i that met
thee there by the cedars, and yet it was not me. something so wild
and fierce, such a hot intruder spirit burned within this poor
circumference, that i think i was damnate and bewitched. thou dost most
clearly understand that this hot fit is over now."

"i clearly understand!"

"and that i love thee no longer," quoth the lady, with a sigh, "or, at
least, not near so much?"

"madam, so i conceive it. be at ease: it is sacred between us two, and
i will forget."

"thanks! a thousand thanks, even for the relief that cold forgetfulness
does give me. and now again, good-by. be gentle to flamaucœur,
and--and," burst out the poor girl, as her control forsook her--"if
there is an eye in the whole of wide heaven, oh, may it watch thee! if
ever prayers of mine can pierce to the seat of the eternal, oh, may
they profit thee! gods! that my wishes were iron bars for thy dear
body, and my salt tears could but rivet them! good-by! good-by!" and,
kissing my hands in a fierce outburst of weeping, that fair white girl
turned and fled, and disappeared through the tapestries that screened
the norman archways.

*       *       *       *       *

before nightfall i was down by the english coast and made many a long
league from the castle. thoughtful and alone, my partings made, i had
paced out from its gloomy archway, the gay feathers on my helmet-top
near brushing the iron teeth of the portcullis lowering above, and my
charger's hoofs falling as hollow on the echoing drawbridge as my heart
beat empty to the sounds of happy life behind me. away south went the
pathway, trodden day after day by contingents of gallant troops from
that knightly stronghold. jove! one might have followed it at midnight:
those jolly bands had made a trail through copse and green wood,
through hamlet and through heather, like the track of a storm-wind.
they had beaten down grass and herbage, they had robbed orchards and
spinneys, and here their wayside fires were still a-smoldering, and
there waved rags upon the bushes, and broken shreds and baggage. now
and then, as i paced along, i saw in the hamlets the folk still looking
southward, and standing gossiping on the week's wonders, the boys
meanwhile careering in mock onset with broken spear-shafts or discarded
trappings. oh! 'twas easy enough to know which way my friends had gone!

so plain was the track, and so well did my good horse acknowledge it,
that there was little for me to do but sit and chew the bitter cud of
fancy. all through the hot afternoon, all through the bright sunshine
and shining green bracken, did we saunter, back toward the gray sea i
knew so well, back toward that void beginning of my wanderings, and as
my sad thoughts turned to when i last had sat a charger in such woods
as these, to my fair saxon homestead, editha, the abbey and its abbot,
my donning english mail and breaking spears for a smile from yon cold
peeress, with much more of like nature, went idly flitting through my
head. but hardly a thought among all that motley crowd was there for
isobel or her tears, and my promised meeting with her playmate.

thus it happened that as evening fell and found me still some two miles
from where our troops lay camped along the shore, waiting to-morrow's
ferrying across to france, i rode down the steep bank of a small river
to a ford, and slowly waded through. there be episodes of action that
live in our minds, and incidents of repose that recur with no less
force. so, then--that placid evening stream has come before me again
and again--in the hot tumult of onset and mêlée, in court and camp, in
the cold of winter and in summer's warmth, i have ridden that ford once
more. i have gone down sad and thoughtful as i did, my loose reins on
my charger's arching neck, watching the purple shine of the water where
it fretted and broke in the evening light against his fetlocks; again
and again i have listened to the soft lisp of the stream as he drank of
that limpid trough, and i have seen in its cool, fresh mirror my own
tall image, my waving crimson plumes, and the one white star of the
evening above, reflected upon it. and yet, if these things of a remote
yesterday are fresh in my mind, even more so is my meeting with the
slim gallant whose figure rose before me as i emerged from the ford.

as my good english charger bore me up from the hollow, on the brow
of the opposite rise was a mounted figure standing out clear and
motionless against the yellow glow of the sunset. at first i thought it
would be some wandering spearman bound on a like errand with myself,
for more than one or two such had passed that day. but something in
the steadfast interest of that silent horseman roused my curiosity
even before i was near enough to see the color of his armor or the
device upon his shield. up we scrambled up that sandy, heathery scar,
the strong sinews of my war-horse playing like steel cordage under my
thighs as he lifted me and my armor up the gravelly path, and then,
as we topped the rise and came into the evening breeze, that strange
warrior advanced and held out a hand.

never in all my experience had i known a knight extend the palm of
friendship to another so demure and downcast. "truth!" i thought to
myself, "this friend of isobel's is, in fact, as she said, the most
modest-mannered soldier who ever took a place in the rough game of
war!" but i was pledged to like him, and therefore, in the most hearty
manner possible, as we came up knee to knee, i slapped my heavy hand
into his extended fingers and welcomed him loudly as a long-looked-for
comrade. and in truth he was a very pretty fellow, whose gentle
presence grew upon me after that first meeting each hour we lived
together. he seemed, as far as i could judge, no more than twenty-five
years of age, yet even that was but a guess, for his armor was complete
from top to toe, his visor was down, and there was, indeed, naught to
judge by but a certain slightness of limb and suppleness that spoke of
no more mature years. in height this gallant was very passable enough,
and his helmet, with its nodding plumes, added some grace and inches
to his stature, while his pale-gray mail was beautifully fashioned and
molded, and spoke through every close joint and cunning finished link
of a young but well-proportioned soldier.

the arms this warrior carried were better suited to his strength than
to that of the man who rode beside him. his lance was long and of
polished inlay, while mine beside it was like the spear of goliath to
a fisher's hazel wand. his dagger was better for cutting the love-knot
on a budget of sonnets than for disburdening foemen's spirits of their
mortal shackles. his cross-hilted sword was so light it made me sigh to
look at it. on his shield was a heart wrapped in flames, most cunningly
painted, and expressive enough in those days, when every man took a
pride in being as vulnerable to women as he was unapproachable among
men.

but who am i that i should judge that gentle knight by myself--by me,
whose sinews countless fights have but matured, who have been blessed
by the gods with bulk and strength above other mortals? why should i
measure his brand-new lance, gleaming in the pride of virgin polish,
against the stern long spear i carried; or that dainty brand of his,
that mayhap his tender maid had belted on him for the first time some
hours before, with such a broad blade as long use had made lighter to
my hand than a lady's distaff?

before we had paced a mile, flamaucœur had proved himself the
sprightliest companion who ever enlivened a dull road with wit and
laughter. at first 'twas i that spoke, for he had not one word in all
the world to say--he was so shy. but when i twitted him for this, and
laughed, and asked him of his lady-love, and how she had stood the
parting--how many tears there had been, and whether they all were hers;
and whose heart was that upon his shield, his own or the damsel's; and
so on, in bantering playfulness, i got down to the metal of that silent
boy. he winced beneath my laughter for a little time, and fidgeted
upon his saddle, and then the gentle blood in his veins answered, as
i hoped it would, and he turned and gave me better than i offered.
such a pretty fellow in wordy fence i never saw: his tongue was like
a woman's, it was so hard to silence. when i thought i had him at
disadvantage on a jest, he burked the point of my telling argument,
and struck me below my guard; when i would have pinned him to some
keen inquiry regarding that which he did not wish to tell, he turned
questioner with swift adroitness, and made--quicker than it takes to
write--his inquisitor the humble answerer to his playful malice. he was
better at that fence than i, there could be no doubt, and very speedily
his nimble tongue, which sounded so strange and pleasant in the hollow
of his helmet, had completely mastered mine. so, with a laugh, i did
acknowledge to the conquest.

whereon that generous youth was pleased, i saw, and laid aside his
coyness, and chattered like a millstream among the gravels on an idle
sunday. he turned out both shrewd and witty, with a head stuffed full
of romance and legend, just such as one might have who had spent a
young life listening to troubadours and minstrels. and i liked him
none the less because he trimmed the gross fables of that time to
such a decent shape. he told me one or two that i had heard before,
although he knew it not. and as i had heard them from the licentious
lips of courtly minstrels they are not fit to write or tell, but my
worthy wayfarer clipped and purged them so adroitly, and turned them
out so fair and seemly, all with such a nice unconsciousness, i scarce
could recognize them. he was a most gentle-natured youth, and there
was something in his presence, something in the half-frankness he put
forth, and something in that there was strange about him which greatly
drew me. now you would think, to listen to him, he was all a babbling
stream as shallow as could be, and then, anon, a turn of sad wisdom or
a sigh set you wondering, as when that same stream runs deep into the
shadows, and you hear it fret and fume with gathering strength far away
in unknown depths of mother earth. a most enticing, a most perplexing
comrade.

beguiling the way in this fashion, and liking my new ally better and
better as we went, we came a little after nightfall on a wet and
windy evening to the hamlet near the sea where the rearguard of the
english troops were collected for ferrying over to france. here we
halted and sought food and shelter, but neither were to be had for
the asking. that little street of english dwellings was crowded with
hungry troopers. they were camping by their gleaming watch-fires all
along the grassy ways, so full was every lodgment, while every yellow
window of the dim gabled alehouse in the midst shone into the wet, dark
night, and every room within was replete with stamping, clanking, noisy
gallants. their chargers filled the yard and were picketed a furlong
down the muddy road, that sloped to the murmuring, unseen sea, and
there was not space, it seemed, for one single other horse or rider in
the whole friendly village.

but the insidious flamaucœur found a way and place. he sought out
the master of the inn himself, and, unheeding of his curt refusals,
made request so cunning and used his money-pouch so liberal that that
strong and surly yeoman, with much to do, found us a loft to sleep in,
which was a bedroom better than the wayside, though still but a rough
one. then flamaucœur waylaid the buxom, hurrying housewife, and, on
an evening when many a good gentleman was going supperless to bed,
got us a loaf of white bread and a wooden bowl of milk, the which we
presently shared most comrade-like, my friend lifting his visor so
much as might suffice to eat, but yet not enough to show his face. he
waylaid a lad, and, for a coin or two, and a little of his sweet-voiced
cajoling, got our steeds watered and sheltered, though many another
lordly, sleek-limbed beast stood all night unwashed, unminded. a most
persuasive youth was flamaucœur!

and then, our frugal supper made and our horses seen to, we went to
bed. diffident, ingenious young knight! he made my couch (while i was
not by) long and narrow--no bigger than for one--of all the soft things
he could lay his hands on--as though, forsooth, i were some tender
flower--and for himself hardly spread a horsecloth on the bare floor!

now, when i came up and found this done, without a word i sent the boy
to go and see what the night was like, and if the moon yet showed, or
if it rained, and, when he went forthwith, pulled that couch to bits,
respreading it so it was broad enough for two good comrades side by
side. ah! and when flamaucœur came back, i rated him soundly, telling
him that, though it was set in the laws of arms that a young knight
should show due deference to an older, yet all that comrades had of
hard or soft was equally dividable, both board and bed, and good luck
and misfortune. and he was amenable, though still a little strange,
and unbuckled his armor by our dim rushlight, and then--poor, tired
youth!--with that iron mask upon his head, in his quilted underwear,
threw himself upon the couch, and slept almost before he could
straighten out those shapely limbs of his.

and i presently lay down by his side and slept, while all through my
dreams went surging the wildest fancies of tilt and tourney and lady's
love. and now i heard in the uproar of the restless village street
and the neighing of the chargers at their pickets the noise of battle
and of onset. and then i thought i had, on some unknown field, five
thousand spearmen overset against a hundred times as many; and while
my heart bounded proudly in answer to that disadvantage, and i rode up
and down our glittering ranks speaking words of strength and courage
to those scanty heroes, waving my shining sword in the sun that shone
for victory on us and curbing my fretting charger's restless valor,
methought, somehow, the words dried up upon my lips, and the proud
murmur of my firm-set veterans turned to a low moaning wail, and a gray
mist of tears put out the sun, and black grief drank up the warriors;
and while i wrestled with that melancholy, blodwen, my princess, was
sitting by my side, cooling my hot forehead with her calm, immortal
hand, and calling me, with smiling accent, "dull, unwitful, easily
beguiled," and all the time that young gallant by me lay limp, supine,
asleep, and soulless.

so passed the checkered fancies of the night, and the earliest dawn
found us up, in arms, and ready for sterner things.

*       *       *       *       *

again i had to owe to flamaucœur's ready wit and liberal purse
precedence for our needs above all the requirements of the many good
knights who would have crossed with the haste they could, but had,
perforce, to wait. it was he who got us a vessel sufficient for our
needs when the fisher folk were swearing there was not a ship to be
hired for twenty miles up or down the coast. in this we embarked with
our horses, and one or two other gentlemen we knew, and in a few hours'
sailing the english shore went down and the sunny cliffs of normandy
rose ahead of us.

will you doubt but that i stood thoughtful and silent as the green
and silver waves were shivered by our dancing prow, and that strange,
familiar land rose up before us? i, that british i, who had seen
cæsar's galleys, heavy with umbrian and etrurian, put out from that
very shore: i, who had stood on the green cliffs of harold's kingdom
and shaken a saxon javelin toward that home of norman tyranny: i, this
knightly, steel-bound i, stood and watched that country grow upon us,
with thoughts locked in my heart there were none to listen to and none
to share.

oh! it was passing strange, and i did not rouse me until our iron keel
went gently grinding up the norman gravel, and our vessel was beached
upon the hostile shore.

chapter xiii

strange, eventful, and bloody, were the incidents that followed.
king edward, burning for glory, had landed in normandy a little time
before, had knighted on these yellow beaches that gallant boy his
son, and with the young prince and some fourteen thousand english
troops, ten thousand wild welshmen, and six thousand irish, pillaging
and destroying as he went, he had marched straight into the heart of
unready france. with that handful of men he had burned all the ships in
hogue, barfleur, and cherbourg; he had stormed montebourg, carentan,
st. lo, and valognes, sending a thousand sails laden with booty back
to england, and now, day by day, he was pressing southward through
his fair rebellious territories, deriding the french king in his own
country, and taking tithe and taxes in rough fashion with fire and
sword.

nor had we who came late far to seek for the sovereign. his whereabouts
was well enough to be told by the rolling smoke that drifted heavily
to leeward of his marching columns and the broad trail of desolation
through the smiling country that marked his stern progress. to travel
that sad road was to see naked war stripped of all her excusing
pageantry, to see gray desolation and lean sorrow following in the gay
train of victory.

gods! it was a sad path. here, as we rode along, would lie the still
smoldering ashes of a burned village, black and gray in the smiling
august sunshine. in such a hamlet, perhaps, across a threshold, his
mouth agape and staring eyes fixed on the unmoved heavens, would lie
a peasant herdsman, his right hand still grasping the humble weapon
wherewith he had sought to protect his home, and the black wound in his
breast showing whence his spirit had fled indignant to the dim place of
explanations.

neither women nor babes were exempt from that fierce ruin. once we
passed a white and silent mother lying dead in mid-path, and the babe,
still clasped in her stiff arms, was ruddy and hungry, and beat with
tiny hands to wake her and crowed angry at its failure, and whimpered
so pitiful and small, and was so unwotting of the merry game of war
and all it meant, that the laughter and talk died away from the lips
of those with me, as, one by one, we paced slowly past that melancholy
thing.

at another time, i remember, we came to where a little maid of some
three tender years was sitting weaving flowers on the black pile of a
ruined cottage, that, though her small mind did not grasp it, hid the
charred bodies of all her people. she twined those white-and-yellow
daisies with fair smooth hands, and was so sunny in the face and
trustful-eyed i could not leave her to marauding irish spears, or the
cruel wolfdogs who would come for her at sunset. i turned my impatient
charger into the black ruin, and, _maugre_ that little maid's consent,
plucked her from the ashes, and rode with her upon my saddle-bow until
we met an honest-seeming peasant woman. to her i gave the waif, with a
silver crown for patrimony.

out in the open the broad stream of war had spread itself. the yellow
harvests were trodden under foot, and hedge and fence were broken. the
plow stood halfway through the furrow, and the reaper was dead with
the sickle in his hand. here, as we rode, went up to heaven the smoke
of coppice and homestead; and there, from the rocks hanging over our
path, luckless maids and widowed matrons would hail and spit upon us in
their wild grief, cursing us in going, in coming, in peace and in war,
while they loaded the frightened echoes with their shrieks and wailings.

now and then, on grass and roadside, were dark patches of new-dried
blood, and by them, maybe, lay country cloaks and caps and weapons.
there we knew men had fallen singly, and had long lain wounded or dead,
until their friends had taken them to grave or shelter. out in the
open again, where skirmishes had happened and bill and bow or spear
had met their like, the dead lay thicker. gods! how drear those fair
french fields did lie in the autumn moonlight, with their scattered
dead in twos and threes and knots and clusters! there were some who
sprawled upon the ground--still clutching in their dread white fingers
the grass and earth torn up in the moment of their agony. and here was
he who scowled with dead white eyes on the pale starlight, one hand on
his broken hilt and the other fast gripped upon the spear that pinned
him to the earth. near him was a fair boy, dead, with the shriek still
seeming upon his livid lips, and the horrid rent in his bosom that had
let out his soul looming black in the gloom. yonder a tall trooper
still stared out grimly after the english, and smiled in death with a
clothyard shaft buried to the feather in his heart. some there were
of these horrid dead who still lay in grapple as they had fallen--the
stalwart saxon and the bronzed gaul with iron fingers on each other's
throats, smiling their black hatred into each other's bloodless white
faces. others, again, lay about whose arms were fixed in air, seeming
still to implore with bloody fingers compassion from the placid sky.

one man i saw had died stroking the thin, pain-streaked muzzle of his
wounded charger--his friend, mayhap, for years in camp and march.
indeed, among many sorrowful things of that midnight field, the dead
and dying horses were not least. it moved me to compassion to hear
their pain-fraught whinnies on every hand, and to see them lying so
stiff and stark in the bloody hollows their hoofs had scooped through
hours of untempered anguish. what could i do for all those many?
but before one i stopped, and regarded him with stern compassion
many a minute. he was a splendid black horse, of magnificent size
and strength; and not even the coat of blood and mud with which his
sweating sides were covered could hide, here and there, the care that
had but lately groomed and tended him. he lay dying on a great sheet
of his own red blood, and as i looked i saw his tasseled mane had been
plaited not long before by some soft, skilful fingers, and at every
point was a bow of ribbon, such as might well have been taken from a
lady's hair to honor the war-horse of her favorite knight. that great
beast was moaning there, in the stillness, thinking himself forgotten,
but when i came and stood over him he made a shift to lift his shapely
head, and looked at me entreatingly, with black hanging tongue and
thirst-fiery eyes, the while his doomed sides heaved and his hot, dry
breath came hissing forth upon the quiet air. well i knew what he asked
for, and, turning aside, i found a trooper's empty helmet, and, filling
it from the willowed brook that ran at the bottom of the slope, came
back and knelt by that good horse, and took his head upon my knee and
let him drink. jove! how glad he was! forgot for the moment was the
battle and his wounds, forgotten was neglect and the long hours of pain
and sorrow! the limpid water went gurgling down his thirsty throat, and
every happy gasp he gave spoke of that transient pleasure. and then, as
the last bright drops flashed in the moonlight about his velvet nozzle,
i laid one hand across his eyes and with the other drew my keen
dagger--and, with gentle remorselessness, plunged it to the hilt into
his broad neck, and with a single shiver the great war-horse died!

in truth, 'twas a melancholy place. on the midnight wind came the wail
of women seeking for their kindred, and the howl and fighting of hungry
dogs at ghastly meals, the smell of blood and war--of smoldering huts
and black ruins! a stern pastime, this, and it is as well the soldier
goes back upon his tracks so seldom!

we passed two days through such sights as i have noted, meeting many
a heavy convoy of spoil on its way to the coast, and not a few of our
own wounded wending back, luckless and sad, to england; and then on
the following evening we came upon the english rear, and were shortly
afterward part and parcel of as desperate and glorious an enterprise as
any that was ever entered in the red chronicles of war. from the coast
right up to the white walls of the fair capital itself, king edward's
stern orders were to pillage and kill and spoil the country, so that
there should be left no sustenance for an enemy behind. i have told
you how the cruel irish mercenaries and the loose soldiers of a baser
sort accomplished the command. our english archers and the light-armed
welsh, who scoured the front, were mild in their methods compared to
them. they mayhap disturbed the quiet of some rustic villages, and in
thirsty frolics broached the kegs of red vintage in captured inns,
robbed hen-roosts, and kissed matrons and set maids screaming, but
they, unlike the others, had some touch of ruth within their rugged
bosoms. but, as for keeps and castles, we stormed and sacked them as we
went, and he alone was rogue and rascal who was last into the breach.
our wild kerns and escaladers rioting in those lordly halls, many a
sight of cruel pillage did i see, and many a time watched the red
flame bursting from the embrasures and windows of these fair baronial
homes, and could not stay it. the frenchmen in these cases, such of
them as were not away with the army we hoped to find, fought brave and
stubborn, and we piled their dead bodies up in their own courtyards.
many a comely dame and damsel did i watch wringing white hands above
these ghastly heaps, and tearing loose locks of raven hair in piteous
appeal to unmoved skies, the while the yellow flames of their comely
halls went roaring from floor to floor, and in mockery of their sobs,
crashing towers and staircases mingled with the yells of the defenders
and the shouting of the pillage.

i fear long ages begin to sap my fiber! there was a time when i would
have sat my war-horse in the courtyard and could have watched the red
blood streaming down the gutters and listened to the shrieking as
cold amid the ruin as any viking on a hostile conquered strand. but,
somehow, with this steel panoply of mine i had put on softer moods; i
am degenerate by the pretty theories of what they called their chivalry.

far be it from me to say the english army was all one pack of
bloodhounds. war is ever a rough game, the country was foreign, and the
adventure we were on was bold and desperate, therefore these things
were done, and chiefly by the unruly regiments, and the scullion irish
who followed in our rear, led by knights of ill-repute, or none. these
hung like carrion crows about our flanks and rear, and, after each
fight, stole armor from dead warriors bolder hands had slain, and
burned, and thieved from high and low, and butchered, like the beasts
of prey they were.

on one occasion, i remember, a skirmish befell shortly after we joined
the main army, and a french noble, in their charge, was unhorsed upon
our front by an english archer. now, i happened to be the only mounted
man just there, and as this silver shining prize staggered to his feet,
and went scampering back toward his friends with all his rich sheathing
safe upon his back, his gold chains rattling on his iron bosom, and his
jeweled belt sparkling as he fled, a savage old english swashbuckler,
whose horse was hamstrung--sir john enkington they called him--fairly
wrung his hands.

"after him, sir knight," screamed that unchivalrous ruffian to me,
"after him, in the name of hell! if thou rid'st hard he cannot get
away, and run thy spear in under his gorget so as not to spoil his
armor--'tis worth, at least, a hundred shillings!"

i never moved a muscle, did not even deign to look down at that cruel
churl. whereon the grizzly old boar-hound clapped his hand upon his
dagger and turned on me--ah! by the light of heaven, he did.

"what! not going, you lazy braggart!" he shouted, beside himself with
rage--"not going, for such a prize? beast--scullion--coward!"

"coward!" had i lived more than a thousand years in a soldier-saddle
to be cowarded by such a hoary whelp of butchery--such a damnable old
taint on the honorable trade of arms? i spun my charger round, and with
my gloved left hand seized that bully by his ragged beard, and perked
him here and there; lifted him fairly off his feet; stretched his
corded, knotted throttle till his breath came thick and hard; jerked
and pulled and twisted him--then cast the ruffian loose, and, drawing
my square iron foot from my burnished stirrup, spurned him here and
there, and kicked and pommeled him, and so at last drove him howling
down the hill, all forgetful for the moment of prize and pillage!

these lawless soldiers were the disgrace of our camp, they did so rant
and roar if all went well and when the battle was fairly won whereto
they had not entered, they were so coward and cruel among the prisoners
or helpless that we would gladly have been rid of them if we could.

but, after the manner of the time, the war was open to all: behind the
flower of english chivalry who rode round the sovereign's standard,
and the gallant bill and bowmen who wore his livery and took his pay,
observing the decencies of war, came hustling and crowding after us
a host of rude mercenaries, a horde of ragged adventurers, who knew
nothing of honor or chivalry, and had no canons but to plunder, ravish,
and destroy.

they made a trade of every villainy just outside the camp, where, with
scoundrel hawkers who followed behind us like lean vultures, they
dealt in dead men's goods, bought maids and matrons, and sold armor or
plunder under our marshal's very eyes.

one day, i remember, i and my shadow flamaucœur were riding home after
scouting some miles along the french lines without adventure, when,
entering our camp by the pickets farthest removed from the royal
quarter, we saw a crowd of irish kerns behind the wood where the king
had stocked his baggage, all laughing round some common object. now,
these irish were the most turbulent and dissolute fighters in the
army. such shock-headed, fiery ruffians never before called themselves
christian soldiers. they and the welsh were forever at feud; but,
whereas the welshmen were brave and submissive to their chiefs, keen
in war, tender of honor, fond of wine-cups and minstrels--gallant,
free soldiers, indeed, just as i had known their kin a thousand years
before; these savage kerns, on the other hand, were remorseless
villains, rude and wild in camp, and cutthroat rascals, without
compunction, when a fight was over. in ordinary circumstances we should
have ridden by these noisy rogues, for they cared not a jot for any
one less than the camp marshal with a string of billmen behind him, and
feuds between knights of king edward's table and these shock-haired
kerns were unseemly. but on this occasion, over the hustling ring of
rough soldiers, as we sat high-perched upon our flemish chargers, we
saw a woman's form, and craned our necks and turned a little from our
course to watch what new devilry they were up to.

there, in the midst of that lawless gang of ruffian soldiers, their
bronzed and grinning faces hedging a space in with a leering,
compassionless wall, was a fair french girl, all wild and torn with
misadventure, her smooth cheeks unwashed and scarred with tears, her
black hair wild and tangled on her back, her skirt and bodice rent and
muddy, fear and shame and anger flying alternate over the white field
of her comely face, while her wistful eyes kept wandering here and
there amid that grinning crowd for a look of compunction or a chance
of rescue. the poor maid was standing upon an overturned box such as
was used to carry cross-bow bolts in, her hands tied hard together in
front, her captor by her side, and as we came near unnoticed he put her
up for sale.

"by congal of the bloody fingers," said that cruel kern in answer to
the laughing questions of his comrades, interlarding his speech with
many fiery and horrid oaths, the which i spare you--"i found this
accursed little witch this morning hiding among the rubbish of yonder
cottage our boys pulled to pieces in the valley; and, as i could not
light on better ware, i dragged her here. but may i roast forever if
i will have anything more to do with her. she is a tigress, a little
she-devil. i have thrashed and beat and kicked her, but i cannot get
the spirit out. let some other fellow try, and may heaven wither him if
he turns her loose near me again! now then, what will the best of you
give? she is a little travel-stained, perhaps--that comes of our march
hither, and our subsequent disagreements--but all right otherwise, and,
an some one could cure her of her spitfire nature and make her amenable
to reason, she would be an ornament to any tent. now you, borghil,
for instance--it was you, i think, who split the mother's skull this
morning--give me a bid for the daughter: you are not often bashful in
such a case as this."

"a penny then!" sang out borghil of the red beard; "and, with maids
as cheap as they be hereabouts, she's dear at that," and, while the
laughter and jest went round, those rude islanders bid point by point
for the unhappy girl who writhed and crouched before them. what could
i do? well i knew the vows my golden spurs put upon me, and the policy
my borrowed knighthood warranted--and yet, she was not of gentle
birth--'twas but the fortune of war. if men risked lives in that stern
game, why should not maids risk something too? king edward hated
turmoil in the camp, and here on desperate venture, far in a hostile
country, my soldier instinct rose against kindling such a blaze as
would have burst out among these lawless, hot-tempered kerns, had i
but drawn my sword a foot from its scabbard. and, thinking thus, i sat
there with bent head scowling behind my visor-bars, and turning my eyes
now to my ready hilt that shone so convenient at my thigh, and anon to
the tall normandy maid, so fair, so pitiful, and in such sorry straits.

while i sat thus uncertain, the girl's price had gone up to fivepence,
and, there being no one to give more, she was about to be handed over
to an evil-looking fellow with a scar destroying one eye, and dividing
his nose with a hideous yellow seam that went across his face from
temple to chin. this gross mercenary had almost told the five coins
into the blood-smudged hand of the other irishman, and the bargain was
near complete, when, to my surprise, flamaucœur, who had been watching
behind me, pushed his charger boldly to the front, and cried out in
that smooth voice of his: "wait a spell, my friends! i think the maid
is worth another coin or two!" and he plunged his hand into the wallet
that hung beside his dagger.

this interruption surprised every one, and for a moment there was a
hush in the circle. then he of the one eye, with a very wicked scowl,
produced and bid another penny, the which flamaucœur immediately capped
by yet another. each put down two more, and then the celt came to the
bottom of his store, and, with a monstrous oath, swept back his money,
and, commending the maid and flamaucœur to the bottom-most pit of hell,
backed off amid his laughing friends.

not a whit disconcerted, my peaceful gallant rode up to the grim
purveyor of that melancholy chattel, and having paid the silver, with a
calm indifference which it shocked me much to see, unwound a few feet
of the halter-rope depending from his fleming's crupper. the loose end
of this the man wound round and tied upon the twisted withies wherewith
the maid's white wrists were fastened.

such an escape from the difficulty had never occurred to my slower
mind, and now, when my lad turned toward the quarter where his tent
lay, and, apparently mighty content with himself, stepped his charger
out with the unhappy girl trailing along at his side, his lightness
greatly pained me. nor was i pleasured by the laughter and gibes of
english squires and knights who met us.

"hullo! you valorous two," called out a mounted captain, "whose
hen-roosts have you been robbing?" and then another said, "faith!
they've been recruiting," and again, "'tis a new page they've got to
buckle them up and smooth their soldier pillows." all this was hard
to bear, and i saw that even flamaucœur hung his head a little and
presently rode along by byways less frequented. at one time he turned
to me most innocent-like and said:

"such a friend as this is just what i have been needing ever since i
left the english shore."

"indeed!" i answered, sardonically, "i do confess i am more surprised
than perhaps i should be. it is as charming a handmaid as any knight
could wish. shall you send one of those long raven tresses home to thy
absent lady with thy next budget of sighs and true-love tokens?"

but flamaucœur shook his head, and said i misunderstood him bitterly.
he was going on to say he meant to free the maid "to-morrow or the next
day," when we turned a corner in our martial village street, and pulled
up at our own tent doors.

now, that breton girl had submitted so far to be dragged along, in
a manner of lethargy born of her sick heart and misery, but when we
stayed our chargers the very pause aroused her. she drew her poor
frightened wits together and glared first at us, and then at our
knightly pennons fluttering over the white lintels of our lodgment;
then, jumping to some dreadful, sad conclusion, she fired up as fierce
and sudden as a trapped tigress when the last outlet is closed upon
her. she stamped and raged, and twisted her fair white arms until the
rough withies on her wrists cut deep into the tender flesh and the
red blood went twining down to her torn and open bodice; she screamed
and writhed, and struggled against the glossy side of that gentle and
mighty war-horse, who looked back wondering on her and sniffed her
flagrant sorrow with wide velvet nostrils--no more moved than a gray
crag by the beating of the summer sea--and then she turned on us.

gads! she swore at us in such mellow bisque as might have made a
hardened trooper envious! cursed us and our chivalry, called us
forsworn knights, stains upon manhood, dogs and vampires!--then dropped
upon her knee, and there suppliant, locked her swollen and bloody
hands, and, with the hot white tears sparkling in her red and weary
eyes, knelt to us, and in the wild, tearful grief of her people, "for
the honor of our mothers, and for the sake of the bright distant maid
we loved," begged mercy and freedom.

and all through that storm of wild, sweet grief that callous libertine,
flamaucœur, made no show of freeing her. he sat his prick-eared,
wondering charger, stared at the maid, and fingered his dagger-chain
as though perplexed and doubtful. the hot torrent of that poor
girl's misery seemed to daze and tie his tongue: he made no sign of
commiseration and no movement, until at last i could stand it no
longer. wheeling round my war-horse, so that i could shake my mailed
fist in the face of that sapling villain:

"by the light of day!" i burst out, half in wrath and half in amused
bewilderment, "this goes too far. why, flamaucœur, can you not see
this is a maid in a hundred, and one who well deserves to keep that
which she asks for? jove! man, if you must have a handmaiden, why, the
country swarms with forlorn ones who will gladly compound with fate
by accepting the protection of thy tent. but this one!--come!--let my
friendship go in pawn against her, and free the maid. if you must have
something more solid--still, set her free, unharmed, and i will give
thee a helmetful of pennies--that is to say, on the first time that i
own so many."

but flamaucœur laughed more scornfully than he often did, and,
muttering that we were "all fools together," turned from me to the wild
thing at his side.

"look here," he said, "you mad girl. come into my tent and i will
explain everything. you shall be all unharmed, i vow it, and free to
leave me if you will not stop--this is all mad folly, though out here i
cannot tell you why."

"i will not trust you," she screamed, in arms again, straining at
those horrid red wrists of hers and glaring on us--"mother of christ!"
she shouted, turning to a knot of squires and captains who had
gathered around us--"for the dear light of heaven some of you free my
wretched spirit with your maces, here--here--some friendly spear for
this friendless bosom--one dagger-thrust to rid me from these cursed
tyrants, and i will take the memory of my slayer straight to the seat
of mercy and mix it forever with my grateful prayers. oh, in christian
charity unsheath a weapon!"

i saw that slim soldier flamaucœur groan within his helmet at this,
then down he bent. "mad, mad girl!" i heard him say, and then followed
a whisper which was lost between his hollow helmet and his prisoner's
ear. whatever it was, the effect was instantaneous and wonderful.

"impossible!" burst out the french girl, starting away as far as the
cords would let her, and eyeing her captor with surprise and amazement.

"'tis truth, i swear it."

"oh, impossible!--thou a"

"hush, hush," cried flamaucœur, putting his hand upon the girl's mouth,
and speaking again to her in his soft low voice, and as he did so her
eyes ran over him, the fear and wonder slowly melted away, and then,
presently, with a delighted smile at length shining behind her undried
tears, she clasped and kissed his hand with a vast show of delight
as ungoverned as her grief had been, and when he had freed her and
descended from his charger, to our amazement, led rather than followed
that knight most willing to his tent, and there let fall the flap
behind them.

"now that," said the king's jester, who had come up while this matter
was passing--"that is what i call a truly persuasive tongue. i would
give half my silver bells to know what magic that gentleman has that
will get reason so quickly into an angry woman's head."

"if you knew that," quoth a stern old knight through the steel bars of
his morion, "you might live a happy life, although you knew nothing
else."

"poor de burgh!" whispered a soldier near me. "he speaks with
knowledge, for men say he owns a vixen, and is more honored and feared
here by the proud frenchman than at his own fireside."

"perhaps," suggested another to the laughing group, "he of the burning
heart whispered that he had a double indulgence in his tent. women will
go anywhere and do anything when it is the church which leads them by
the nose."

"or, perhaps," put in another, looking at the last speaker--"perhaps
he hinted that if the maid escaped from his hated clutches she would
fall into thine, st. caen, and she chose the lesser evil. it were an
argument that would well warrant so sudden a conversion!"

"well! well!" quoth the fool, "we will not quarrel over the remembrance
of the meat which another dog has carried off. good-by, fair sirs, and
may god give you all as efficient tongues as sir flamaucœur's when next
you are bowered with your distant ladies!" and laughing and jesting
among themselves the soldiers strolled away, leaving me to seek my
solitary tent in no good frame of mind.

chapter xiv

such sights and scenes as these will show the chivalrous army with whom
i served in but an indifferent light. and ill it would beseem me, who
remember this time with pride, and the gloomy pleasure of my latter
life, to stain the fair fame of english chivalry or to discredit with
the foul life of its outer remnant our gallant army or that royal
person who shone in the white light of his day, the bravest knight and
the gentlest king of any then living.

this sovereign was, above everything, a soldier. he observed all
that passed in his camp with extraordinary acumen. it was my chance,
soon after we joined the army, to catch his eye by some small deed
of prowess in a mêlée near his standard, and that shrewd sovereign
called me to him, and asked my name and fame--the which i answered
plausibly enough, for my tongue was never tied to the cold sterility
of truth--and then, pointing to where there lay on his shield a famous
dead english captain of mercenaries, asked me if i would do duty
for that soldier. i knew the troops he had led. they were grizzled
veterans, rough old dogs every one of them, who had rode their
close-packed chargers, shoulder to shoulder, through the thick tangles
of a hundred fights. i had seen them alone, those stern old fellows,
put down their lances and, altogether, like the band of close-united
brothers that they were, go thundering over the dusty french campagnas,
and, to the music that they loved so well, of ringing bits and
hollow-sounding scabbards, of steel martingale and harness--delighting
in the dreadful odds--charge ten times their number, and burst through
the reeling enemy, and override and trample him down, and mow great
swathes from his seething ranks, and revel in that thunderous carnage,
as if the red dust of the mêlée were the sweetest air that had ever
fanned their aged beards!

"ah! prince!" i said, speaking out boldly as that remembrance came
before me, "by thor! if those good fellows will take so young a one as
i for leader, in place of a better, i will gladly let it be a compact."

"they will have you readily enough," replied the king, "even if it were
not mine by right to name their captain, according to their rules."
and, mounting the gray palfrey, he rode in camp, the better to spare
his roan war-horse, he took me to where the troops were ranged up after
the charge that had cost them their leader, and gave them over to me.

thus was i provided with a lordly following, and the king's gratitude
for my poor service expressed; but still i appeared strangely to haunt
the sovereign's memory. he looked back at me once or twice as though i
were something most uncommon, and not long afterward he would have me
sup with him.

it happened as we fell back from the farthest limit of our raid,
burning and plundering as we went along the somme. one evening a fair
french chateau on a hill, bending down by grassy slopes to the slow
stream below, had fallen to our assault. in truth, that fair pile had
found us rude visitors. twice in the storm the red flames had burst
out of its broad upper corridors, and twice had been subdued. its
doors and gateways were beaten in, its casements burst and empty,
the moat about it was full of dead men, the ivy hung in unsightly
tatters from its turrets, and on the smooth grass glacis copingstone
and battlements--hurled on us by the besieged as we swarmed up the
ladders--lay in crumbling ruins. yet it was, as i say, a stately place,
even in its new-made desolation; and i was standing at the close of a
long, dusty autumn day by my tent door, watching the yellow harvest
moon come over the low french hills, and shedding as it rose a pale
light over the english camp and that lordly place a little set back
from it, when down through the twilight came a page who wore on sleeve
and tunic-breast the royal cognizance. was i, he questioned, the
stranger knight new come from england? and, that being answered, he
gave his message: "king edward would be glad if that knight would take
his evening meal with him."

i went--how could i else?--and there in the great torn and disordered
hall of the castle we had taken was a broad table spread and already
laid with rough magnificence. page and squire were hurrying here
and there in that stately pillared chamber, spreading on the tables
white linens that contrasted most strangely with the black, new-made
smoke-stains on the ceiling; piling on them gold and silver basins
and ewers and plates bent and broken, just as our men-at-arms had
saved them from pillaged crypts or rifled treasure-cells. others were
fixing a hundred gleaming torches to the notched, scarred columns of
that banquet-place, and while one would be wiping half-dried blood
of french peer and peasant from floor and doorway, or sprinkling
rushes or sawdust on those gory patches, another was decanting redder
burgundy--the which babbled most pleasantly to thirsty soldier ears as
it passed in gushing streams from the cellar skins to supper flagon! it
was an episode full of quaint contradictions!

but it was not at the feast i looked--not at the gallant table already
flashing back the gleaming crimson lights from its stored magnificence.
there round that hall in groups and two and threes, chatting while
they waited, laughing and talking over the incidents of the day, were
some hundred warlike english nobles. and amid them, the most renowned
warrior where all were famous, the tallest and most resolute-looking
in a circle of heroes, stood the king. his quick, restless eye saw me
enter, and he came toward me, slighting my reverence, and taking my
hand like one good soldier welcoming another. he led me round that
glittering throng, making me known to prince and captain, and knight
and noble, and ever as we went a hush fell upon those gallant groups.
maybe 'twas all the king's presence, but i doubt it. it was not on him
all eyes were fixed so hard, it was not for him those stern soldiers
were silent a spell and then fell to whisper and wondering among
themselves as we passed down the pillared corridor--ah! nor was it all
on account of that familiar, knightly host that the page-boys in gaping
wonder upset the red wine, and the glamoured servers forgot to set down
their loaded dishes as they stood staring after us! no matter! i was
getting accustomed to this silent awe, and little regarded it. it was
but the homage, i thought, their late-born essences paid unwitting to
my older soul.

well! we talked and laughed a spell, seeming to wait for something,
the while the meat grew cold, and then the arras over the great arch
at the bottom of the hall lifted, and with hasty strides, like those
late to a banquet, came in two knights. the first was black from top to
toe--black was his dancing plume, black was his gleaming armor, black
were his gloves and gyves, and never one touch of color on him but the
new golden spurs upon his heels and the broad jewel belt that held his
cross-handled sword.

as this dusky champion entered a smile of pleasure shone over the
king's grave face. he ran to him and took his hand, the while he put
his other affectionately on his shoulder.

"my dear boy!" he said, forgetting monarch in father, "i have been
thinking of thee for an hour. you are working too hard; you must be
weary. are there no tough captains in my host that you must be in
the saddle early and late, and do a hundred of the duties of those
beneath you, trying with that young hand of yours each new-set stake
of our evening palisades, sampling the rude soldiers' supper-rations,
seeing the troop go down to water, and counting and conning the lay
of the frenchman's twinkling watch-fire? my dear hungry lad, you are
over-zealous--you will make me grieve for that new knighthood i have
put upon you!"[3]

[3] the black prince, then sixteen years old, was knighted on the
normandy beach, where the expedition landed.

"oh, 'tis all right, father! i am but trying to infuse a little shame
of their idle ways into this silken company of thine. but i do confess
i am as hungry as well can be--hast saved a drink of wine and a loaf
for me?"

"saved a loaf for thee, my handsome boy! why, thou shouldst have a
loaf though it were the last in france and though the broad stream of
england's treasure were run dry to buy it. we have waited--we have not
e'en uncovered."

"why, then, father, i will set the example. here! some of you squires
discover me; i have been plated much too long!" and the ready pages ran
forward, and with willing fingers rid the young prince of his raven
harness. they unbuckled and unriveted him, until he stood before us
in the close-fitting quilted black silk that he wore beneath, and i
thought, as i stood back a little way and watched, that never had i
seen a body at once so strong and supple. then he ran his hands through
his curly black hair, and took his place midway down the table; the
king sat at the head; and when the chaplain had muttered a latin grace
we fell to work.

it was a merry meal in that ample hall, still littered under the arches
with the broken rubbish of the morning's fight. the courteous english
king sat smiling under the stranger canopy, and overhead--rocking in
the breeze that came from broken casements--were the tattered flags
our dead foeman's hands had won in many wars. our table shone with
heaped splendor shot out from the spoil-carts at the door; the king's
seneschal blazed behind his chair in cloth of gold; while honest rough
troopers in weather-stained leather and rusty trappings (pressed on
the moment to do squires' duty) waited upon us, and ministered, after
the fashion of their stalwart inexperience, to our needs. amid all
those strange surroundings we talked of wine, and love, and chivalry;
we laughed and drank, tossing off our beakers of red burgundy to the
health of that soldier sovereign under the daïs, and drank deep bumpers
to the gray to-morrow that was crimsoning the eastern windows ere we
had done. indeed, we did that night as soldiers do who live in pawn
to chance, and snatch hasty pleasures from the brink of the unknown
while the close foeman's watch-fires shine upon their faces, and each
forethinks, as the full cups circle, how well he may take his next meal
in paradise. of all the courtly badinage and warrior-mirth that ran
round the loaded table while plates were emptied and tankards turned,
but one thing lives in my mind. truth, 'twas a strange chance, a most
quaint conjunction, that brought that tale about, and put me there to
hear it!

i have said that when the black prince entered the banquet hall there
came another knight behind him, a strong, tall young soldier in
glittering mail, something in whose presence set me wondering how or
where we two had met before. ere i could remember who this knight might
be, the king and prince were speaking as i have set down, and then the
trumpets blew and we fell to meat and wine with soldier appetites,
and the unknown warrior was forgotten, until--when the feast was well
begun, looking over the rim of a circling silver goblet of malmsey i
was lifting, at a youth who had just taken the empty place upon my
right--there--jove! how it made me start!--unhelmeted, unharnessed,
lightly nodding to his comrades and all unwotting of his wondrous
neighborhood, was that same lord codrington, that curly-headed
gallant who had leaned against me in the white moonlight of st. olaf's
cloisters when i was a blessed relic, a silent, mitered, listening,
long-dead miracle!

gods! you may guess how i did glare at him over the sculptured rim
of that great beaker, the while the red wine stood stagnant at my
lips--and then how my breath did halt and flag as presently he turned
slow and calm upon me, and there--a foot apart--the living and the
dead were face to face, and front to front! i scarce durst breathe as
he took the heavy pledge-cup from my hand--would he know me? would he
leap from his seat with a yell of fear and wonder, and there, from
some distant vantage-point among the shadowy pillars, with trembling
finger impeach me to that startled table? hoth! i saw in my mind's
eye those superstitious warriors tumbling from their places, the
while i alone sat gloomy and remorseful at the littered tressels, and
huddling and crowding to the shadows--as they would not for a thousand
frenchmen--while that brave boy with chattering teeth and white fingers
clutched upon the kingly arm did, incoherent, tell my tale, and with
husky whisper say how 'twas no soldier of flesh and blood who sat there
alone at the long white table, under the taper lights, self-damned by
his solitude! i waited to see all this, and then that soldier, nothing
wotting, glanced heedlessly over me--he wiped his lips with his napkin,
and took a long draught of the wine within the cup. then smiling as he
handed it on, and turning lightly round as he laughed, "a very good
tankard, indeed, sir stranger--such a one as is some solace for eight
hours in a flemish saddle! but there was just a little too much nutmeg
in the brew this time--didst thou not think so?"

i murmured some faint agreement, and sat back into my place, watching
the great beaker circle round the table, while my thoughts idly hovered
upon what might have chanced had i been known, and how i might have
vantaged or lost by recognition. well! the chance had passed, and i
would not take it back. and yet, surely fate was sporting with me! the
cup had scarcely made the circle and been drained to the last few drops
among the novices at the farther end, when i was again in that very
same peril!

"you are new from england, lord worringham," the young earl said across
me to a knight upon my other hand: "is there late news of interest to
tell us?"

"hardly one sentence. all the news we had was stale reports of what
you here have done. men's minds and eyes have been all upon you, and
each homeward courier has been rifled of his budget at every port and
village on his way by a hundred hungry speculators, as sharply as
though he were a rich wanderer beset by footpads on a lonely heath. the
common people are wild to hear of a great victory, and will think of
nothing else. there is not one other voice in england--saving, perhaps,
that some sleek city merchants do complain of new assessments, and
certain reverend abbots, 'tis said, of the havoc you have played with
this year's vintage."

"yes," answered the earl with a laugh, "one can well believe that last.
sanctity, i have had late cause to know, is thirsty work. why, the very
abbot of st. olaf's himself, usually esteemed a right reverend prelate,
did charge me at my last confessional to send him hence some vats of
malmsey! no doubt he shrewdly foresaw this dearth that we are making."

"what!" exclaimed the other knight, staring across me. "hast thou
actually confessed to that bulky saint? mon dieu! but you are in
luck! why, lord earl, thou hast disburdened thyself to the wonder of
the age--to the most favored son of mother church--the associate of
beatified beings--and the particularly selected of the apostles! dost
not know the wonder that has happened to st. olaf's?"

"not a whit. it was ordinary and peaceful when i was there a few weeks
back."

"then, by my spurs, there is some news for you! you remember that
wondrous thing they had, that sleeping image that men swore was an
actual living man, and the holy brothers, who, no doubt, were right,
declared was a blessed saint that died three hundred years ago? you too
must know him, sir," he said, turning to me, and looking me full in the
face: "you must know him, if you ever were at st. olaf's."

"yes," i answered, calmly returning his gaze. "i have been at st.
olaf's at one time or another, and i doubt if any man living knows that
form you speak of better than i do myself."

"and i," put in the devout young earl, "know him too. a holy and very
wondrous body! surely god's beneficence still shields him in his sleep?"

"shields him! why, codrington, he has been translated; removed just as
he was to celestial places; 'tis on the very word of the abbot himself
we have it, and, where good men meet and talk in england, no other tale
can compete for a moment with this one."

"out with it, bold worringham! surely such a thing has not happened
since the time of elijah."

"'tis simple enough, and i had it from one who had it from the abbot's
lips. that saintly recluse had spent a long day in fast and vigils
amid the cloisters of his ancient abbey--so he said--and when the
evening came had knelt after his wont an hour at the shrine, lost
in holy thought and pious exercise. nothing new or strange appeared
about the wonder. it lay as it had ever lain, silent, in the cathedral
twilight, and the good man, full of gentle thoughts and celestial
speculations, if we may take his word for it--and god forfend i should
do otherwise!--the holy father even bent over him in fraternal love and
reverence the while, he says, the beads ran through his fingers as ave
and paternoster were told to the sleeping martyr's credit by scores
and hundreds. not a sign of life was on the dead man's face. he slept
and smiled up at the vaulted roof just as he had done year in and out
beyond all memory, and therefore, as was natural, the abbot thought he
would sleep on while two stones of the cathedral stood one upon another.

"he left him, and, pacing down the aisles, wended to the refectory,
where the brothers had near done their evening meal, and there, still
in holy meditation, sat him down to break that crust of dry bread
and drink that cup of limpid water which (he told my friend) was his
invariable supper."

"hast thou ever seen the reverend father, good worringham?" queried a
young knight across the table as the story-teller stopped for a moment
to drink from the flagon by his elbow.

"yes, i have seen him once or twice."

"why, so have i," laughed the young soldier--"and, by all the saints in
paradise, i do not believe he sups on husks and water."

"believe or not as you will, it is a matter between thyself and
conscience. the abbot spoke, and i have repeated just what he said."

"on with the story, lord earl," laughed another: "we are all
open-mouthed to hear what came next, and even if his reverence--in
holy abstraction, of course--doth sometime dip fingers into a venison
pasty by mistake for a bread trencher, or gets hold of the wine-vessel
instead of the water-beaker--'tis nothing to us. suppose the reverent
meal was ended--as jerome says it should be--in humble gladness, what
came then?"

"what came then?" cried worringham. "why, the monks were all away--the
tapers burned low--the abbot sat there by himself, his praying hands
crossed before him--when wide the chancery door was flung, and there,
in his grave-clothes, white and tall, was the saint himself!"

every head was turned as the english knight thus told his story, and,
while the younger soldiers smiled disdainfully, good codrington at
my side crossed himself again and again, and i saw his soldier lips
trembling as prayer and verse came quick across them.

"ah! the saint was on foot without a doubt, and it might have chilled
all the breath in a common man to see him stand there alive, and
witful, who had so long been dead and mindless, to meet the light of
those sockets where the eyes had so long been dull! but 'tis a blessed
thing to be an abbot!--to have a heart whiter than one's mother's milk,
and a soul of limpid clearness. that holy friar, without one touch of
mortal fear--it is his very own asseveration--rose and welcomed his
noble guest, and sat him in the daïs, and knelt before him, and adored,
and, bold in goodness, waited to be cursed or canonized--withered by a
glance of those eyes no man could safely look on, or hoist straight to
st. peter's chair, just as chance should have it."

"wonderful and marvelous!" gasped codrington, "i would have given
all my lands to have knelt at the bottom of that hall whose top was
sanctified by such a presence."

"and i," cried another knight, "would have given this dinted suit of
milan that i sit in, and a tattered tent somewhere on yonder dark
hillside (the which is all i own of this world), to have been ten miles
away when that same thing happened. surely it was most dread and grim,
and may heaven protect all ordinary men if the fashion spreads with
saints!"

"they will not trouble you, no doubt, good comrade. this one rose in
no stern spirit to rebuke, but as the pale commissioner of heaven to
reward virtue and bless merit. ill would it beseem me to tell, or you,
common, gross soldiers of the world, to listen to what passed between
those two. 'twere rank sacrilege to mock the new-risen's words by
retailing them over a camp table, even though the table be that of the
king himself; and who are we, rough, unruly sons of mother church, that
we should submit to repetition the converse of a prelate with one we
scarce dare name!" whereon worringham drank silently from his goblet,
and half a dozen knights crossed themselves devoutly.

"and there is another reason why i should be silent," he continued.
"the abbot will not tell what passed between them. only so much as
this: he gives out with modest hesitance that his holy living and great
attainments had gone straighter to heaven than the smoke of abel's
altar-fire, and thus, on these counts and others, he had been specially
selected for divine favors, and his ancient church for miracle. the
priest, so the wonder vowed, must be made a cardinal, and have next
reversion of the papal chair. meanwhile pilgrims were to hold the
wonder-shrine of st. olaf's no less holy tenantless than tenanted, to
be devout, and above all things liberal, and pray for the constant
intercession of that messenger who could no longer stay. whereon, quoth
the abbot, a wondrous light did daze the watcher's sight--unheard,
unseen of other men the walls and roof fell wide apart--and then and
there, amid a wondrous hum of voices and countless shooting stars, that
presence mounted to the sky, and the abbot fell fainting on the floor!"

"truly a strange story, and like to make st. olaf's coffers fuller than
king edward's are."

"and to do sterling service to the reverend prior! what think you,
sir?" said one, turning to me, who had kept silent all through this
strange medley of fact and cunning fiction. "is it not a tale that
greatly redounds to the holy father's credit, and like to do him
material service?"

"no doubt," i answered, "it will serve the purpose for which 'twas
told. but whether the adventure be truly narrated or not only the abbot
and he who supped with him can know."

"ah!" they laughed, "and, by our lady! you may depend upon it the
priest will stick to his version through thick and thin."

"and by all oaths rolled in one," i fiercely cried, striking my first
upon the table till the foeman's silver leaped (for the lying abbot's
story had moved my wrath), "by thor and odin, by cruel osiris, by the
bones of hengist and his brother, that saint will never contradict him!"

shortly after we rose, and each on his rough pallet sought the rest a
long day's work had made so grateful.

*       *       *       *       *

yes! we sought it, but to one, at least, it would not come for long!
hour after hour i paced in meditation about my tent with folded arms
and bent head, thinking of all that had been or might have been,
and, after that supper of suggestions, the last few weeks rose up
strongly before me. again and again all that i had seen and done in
that crowded interval swept by my eyes, but the one thing that stayed
while all others faded, the one ever-present shadow among so many,
was the remembrance of the fair, unhappy girl isobel. full of rougher
thoughts, i have not once spoken of her, yet, since we landed on this
shore, her winning presence had grown on me every day i lived, and
now to-night, here, close on the eve, as we knew it, of a desperate
battle, wherefrom no man could see the outcome, the very darkness all
about me, after the flickering banquet lights, were full of isobel. i
laughed and frowned by turn to myself in my lonely walk that evening,
to find how the slighted girl was growing upon me. was i a silly squire
at a trysting-place, decked out with love-knots and tokens, a green
gallant in a summer wood, full of sighs and sonnets, to be so witched
by the bare memory of a foolish white wench who had fallen enamored
of my swart countenance? it was idle nonsense; i would not yield. i
put it behind me, and thought of to-morrow--the good king and my jolly
comrades--and then there again was the outline of isobel's fair face
in the yellow rift of the evening sky; there were isobel's clear eyes
fixed, gentle and reproachful, on me, and the glimmer of her white
draperies amid the shifting shadow of the tent, and even the evening
wind outside was whispering as it came sighing over the wild grass
lands--"isobel!" ah! and there was something more behind all that
thought of isobel. there were eyes that looked from isobel's shadowy
face, wherever in my fancy i saw it, that filled me with a strange
unrest, and a whisper behind the whispers of that maiden voice that was
hers and yet was not--a fine thin music that played upon the fibers of
my heart; a presence behind a haunting presence; a meaning behind a
meaning that stirred me with the strangest fancies. and before another
night was over i understood them!

well, in fact and in deed, i was in love like many another good
soldier, and long did i strive to find a specific for the gentle
malady, but when this might not be--why, i laughed!--the thing itself
must needs be borne; 'twas a common complaint, and no great harm; when
the war was over, i would get back to england, and, if the maid were
still of the same way of thinking--had i not stood a good many knocks
and buffets in the world?--a little ease would do me good. ah! a very
fair maid--a fair maid, indeed! and her dower some of the fattest land
you could find in a dozen shires!

thus, schooling myself to think a due entertainment of the malady
were better than a churlish cure, i presently decided to write to the
lady; for, i argued, if to-morrow ends as we hope it may, why, the
letter will be a good word for a homeward traveling hero crowned with
new-plucked bays; and if to-morrow sees me stiff and stark, down in yon
black valley, among to-morrow's silent ones, still 'twill be a meet
parting, and i owe the maid a word or two of gentleness. i determined,
therefore, to write to her at once a scroll, not of love--for i was not
ripe for that--but of compassion--of just those feelings that one has
to another when the spark of love trembles to the kindling but is not
yet ablaze. and because i did not know my own mind to any certainty,
and because that youth flamaucœur was both shrewd and witty--as
ready-witted and as nimble, indeed, with tongue and pen as though he
were a woman--i determined it should be he who should indite that
epistle and ease my conscience of this duty which had grown to be so
near a pleasure.

i sent forthwith for flamaucœur, and he came at once, as was his wont,
sheathed in comely steel from neck to heel, his close-shut helm upon
his head, but all weaponless as usual, save for a toy dagger at his
side.

"good friend," i said, "you carry neither sword nor mace. that is not
wise in such a camp as this, and while the frenchman's watchfires smoke
upon the eastern sky. but, never mind, i will arm thee myself for the
moment. here"--passing him the things a writer needs--"here is a little
weapon wherewith they say much mischief has been done at one time or
another in the world, and some sore wounds taken and given; wield it
now for me in kinder sort, and write me the prettiest epistle thou
canst--not too full of harebrained love or the nonsense that minstrels
deal in--but friendly, suave and gentle, courteous to my lady-love!"

"to whom?" gasped flamaucœur, stepping back a pace.

"par dieu, boy!" i laughed. "i spoke plain enough! why, thou consumèd
dog in the manger, while thy own heart is confessedly in condition of
eternal combustion, may not another knight even warm himself by a spark
of love without your glowering at him so between the bars of thine iron
muzzle? come! why should not i love a maid as well as you--ah! and
write to her a farewell on the eve of battle?"

"oh! write to whom you will, but i cannot--will not--help you"; and
the youth, who knew nothing of my affections, and to whom i had never
spoken of a woman before, walked away to the tent door and lifting the
flap, looked out over the dim french hills, seeming marvelous perturbed.

poor lad, i thought to myself, how soft he is! my love reminds him of
his own, and hence he fears to touch a lover pen. and yet he must. he
can write twice as ingenious, shrewd as i, and no one else could do
this letter half so well. "come, flamaucœur! indeed, you must help me.
if you are so sorry over your own reflections, why, the more reason for
lending me thy help. we are companions in this pretty grief, and should
render to each the help due between true brothers in misfortune. i do
assure you i have near broken a maiden heart back in england."

"perhaps she was unworthy of thy love--why should you write?"

"unworthy! gods! she was unhappy, she was unfortunate--but unworthy,
never! why, flamaucœur, here, as i have been chewing the cud of
reflection all these days, i have begun to think she was the whitest,
sweetest maid that ever breathed."

"some pampered, sickly jade, surely, sir knight," murmured the young
man in strange jealous-sounding tones whereof i could not fail to heed
the bitterness; "let her by, she has forgotten thee mayhap, and taken a
new love--those pink-and-white ones were ever shallow!"

"shallow! you wayward boy! by hoth! had you seen our parting you would
not have said so. why, she wept and clung to me, although no words of
love had ever been between us"

"a jade, a wanton!" sobbed that strange figure there by the shadowy
tent-flap, whereon, flaming up, "god's death!" i shouted, "younker,
that goes too far! curb thy infernal tongue, or neither thy greenness
nor unweaponed state shall save thee from my sword!"

"and i," quoth flamaucœur, stepping out before me--"i deride thy
weapon--i will not turn one hair's breadth from it--here! point it
here, to this heart, dammed and choked with a cruel affection! oh!
i am wretched and miserable, and eager against all my instincts for
to-morrow's horrors!"

whereat that soft and silly youth turned his gorget back upon me and
leaned against the tent-pole most dejectedly. and i was grieved for
him, and spun my angry brand into the farthest corner, and clapped him
on the shoulder, and cheered him as i might, and then, half mindful to
renounce my letter, yet asked him once again.

"come! thou art steadier now. wilt thou finally write for me to my
leman?"

"by every saint in paradise," groaned the unhappy flamaucœur, "i will
not!"

"what! not do me a favor and please thy old friend, isobel of
oswaldston, at one and the same time?"

"please whom?" shrieked flamaucœur, starting like a frightened roe.

"why, you incomprehensible boy, isobel of oswaldston, thy old
playmate, isobel. surely i had told thee before it was of her i was
thus newly enamored?"

what passed then within that steel casque i did not know, though now i
well can guess, but that slim gallant turned from me, and never a word
he spoke. a gentle tremor shook him from head to heel, and i saw the
steel plates of his harness quiver with the throes of his pent emotion,
while the blue plumes upon his helmet-top shook like aspen-leaves in
the first breath of a storm, and over the bars of his cruel visor there
rippled a sigh such as surely could only have come from deep down in a
human heart.

all this perplexed me very much and made me thoughtful, but before i
could fashion my suspicions, flamaucœur mastered his feelings, and
came slowly to the little table, and, saying in a shy, humble voice,
wondrously altered, "i will write to thy maid!" drew off his steel
gauntlet and took up the pen. that smooth, fine hand of his trembled a
little as he spread the paper on the table, and then we began.

our camp by the somme.

august 24, 1376.

to the excellent lady isobel of oswaldston this brings
greeting and salutation.

madam: may it please you to accept the homage of the
humblest soldier who serves with king edward?

*       *       *       *       *

"that," said flamaucœur, stopping for a moment to sharpen his pen, "is
not a very amorous beginning."

"no," i answered, "and i have a mind first only to tell her how we
fare. you see, good youth, our parting was such she weeps in solitude,
i expect, hoping nothing from me, and therefore, i would wish to break
my amendment to her gently. faith! she may be dying of love for aught
i know, and the shock of a frank avowal of my new-awakened passion
might turn her head."

"why yes, sir knight," quoth my comrade, taking a fresh dip of ink,
"or, on the other hand, she may now be footing it to some gay measure
on those polished floors we wot of, or playing hide-and-seek among the
tapestries with certain merry gallants!"

"jove! if i thought so!"

"well, never mind. get on with thy missive, and i will not interrupt
again."

*       *       *       *       *

after leaving your father's castle, madam, i fell in about nightfall
with that excellent youth, flamaucœur, according to your ladyship's
supposition. we crossed the narrow sea; and since, have scarcely had
time to dine or sleep, or wipe down our weary chargers, or once to
scour our red and rusty armor. we joined king edward, madam, just as
his highness unfurled the lions and fleur de lys upon the green slopes
of the seine, and thence, right up to the walls of paris, we scoured
the country. we turned then, queen of tournaments, northward, toward
flanders.

*       *       *       *       *

at this flamaucœur lay down his pen for a moment, and, heaving a sigh,
exclaimed, "that ‘queen of tournaments' does not come well from thee,
sir knight! thou slighted this very girl once in the lists when the
prize was on thy spear-point."

"par dieu! and so i did. i had clean forgotten it! but how, in heaven's
name, came you to know of that, who were not there?"

"some one told me of it," replied the boy, looking away from me, as
though he were lying.

"well, cross it out!"

"not i! the maid already knows, no doubt, the fickleness of men, and
this will surprise her no more than to see a weathercock go round when
the wind doth change. proceed!"

*       *       *       *       *

heavily laden with booty, we turned toward flanders. we gained two days
ago the swelling banks of the somme, and down this sluggish stream,
taking what we listed as we went with the red license of our revengeful
errand, we have struggled until here, fair lady. but each hour of
this adventurous march has seen us closer and more closely beset. the
broad stream runs to north of us, the burgher levies of amiens are
mustering thick upon our right and behind, gods! so close, that now
as this is penned the black canopy of the night is all ruddy where
his countless watchfires glimmer on the southern sky; behind us comes
the pale respondent in this bloody suit that we are trying--philip,
who says that france is his by salic law, and no rod of it, no foot
or inch on this side of the salt sea, ever can or shall be edward's.
and for jurors, madam, to the assize that will be held so shortly he
has gathered from every corner of his vassal realm a hundred thousand
footmen and twenty thousand horse; a score of perjured princes make
his false quarrel doubly false by bearing witness to it, and here,
to-morrow at the farthest, we do think, they will arraign us, and put
this matter to the sharp adjustment of the sword. against that great
host that threatens us we are but a handful, four thousand men at
arms all native to the english shires, ten thousand archers, as many
light-armed welshmen, and four thousand wild irish.

*       *       *       *       *

"there!" i said with pride, as flamaucœur's busy pen came to a
stop--"there! she will know now how it goes with king edward's gallant
english."

"why, yes, no doubt she may," responded my friend; "but maids are more
apt to be interested in the particular than in the general. you have
addressed her so far like the presiding captain of a warlike council.
is there nothing more to come?"

"gads! that's true enough! i have left out all the love!"

"yet that is what her hungry eyes will look for when her fingers untie
this silk."

"why, then, take up your pen again and write thus:

*       *       *       *       *

‘and, madam, to-morrow's battle, if it comes, will be no light affair.
he who sends this to thee may, ere it reaches thy hand, be numbered
among the things that are past. therefore he would also that all
negligence of his were purged by such atonement as he can make, and
all crudeness likewise amended. and in particular he offers to thee,
whose virtues and condescension late reflection have brought lively to
his mind, his most dutiful and appreciative homage. you, who have so
good a knowledge of his poor taste, will pardon his ineloquence, but he
would say to thee, in fact, that thy gentleness and worth were never so
conscious to him as here to-night, when the red gleam of coming battle
plays along the evening sky, and, if he wears no token in his helmet in
to-morrow's fray, 'tis because he has none of thine.'

*       *       *       *       *

"there, boy! 'tis not what i meant to say--and very halting, yet she
will guess its meaning. dost thou not think so?"

"guess its meaning! oh, dear comrade, she will live again and feed
upon it--wake and sleep upon it, and wear it next her heart, just as i
should were i she and you were he."

"but it is so beggarly and poor expressed," i said, with pleased
humility.

"she will not think so," cried flamaucœur. "if i know aught of maids,
she will think it the most blessed vellum that ever was engrossed, she
will like its style better than the wretched culprit likes the style of
the reprieve the steaming horseman flaunts before him. she'll con each
line and letter, and puncture them with tears and kisses--thou hast had
small ken of maids, i think, sweet soldier!"

"well! well! it may be so. do up the letter, since it will read so
well, and put it in the way to be taken by the first messenger who
sails for england. then we will ride round the posts and see how near
the frenchman's watchfires be. and so to sleep, good friend, and may
the many-named powers which sit on high wake us to a happy to-morrow!"

chapter xv

a volume might well be written on what i must compress into this
chapter. on the narrow canvas of these few pages must be outlined
the crowded incidents of that noble fight above crecy, whereof your
historians know but half the truth, and these same lines, charged with
the note of victory, full of the joyful exultation of the mêlée and
dear delight of hard-fought combat--these lines must, too, record my
own illimitable grief.

if while i write you should hear through my poor words aught of the
loud sound of conflict, if you catch aught of the meeting of two
great hosts led on by kingly captains, if the proud neighing of the
war-steeds meet you through these heavy lines and you discern aught of
the thunder of charging squadrons, aught of the singing wind that plays
above a sea of waving plumes as the chivalry of two great nations rush,
like meeting waves, upon each other, so shall you hear, amid all that
joyful tumult, one other sound, one piercing shriek, wherefrom not
endless scores of seasons have cleared my ears.

listen, then, to the humming bow-strings on the crecy slopes--to the
stinging hiss of the black rain of english arrows that kept those
heights inviolable--to the rattle of unnumbered spears, breaking like
dry november reeds under the wild hog's charging feet, as rank behind
rank of english gentlemen rush on the foe! listen, i say, with me
to the thunderous roar of france's baffled host, wrecked by its own
mightiness on the sharp edge of english valor, listen to the wild
scream of hireling fear as doria's crossbowmen see the english pikes
sweep down upon them; listen to the thunder of proud alençon sweeping
round our lines with every glittering peer in france behind him,
himself in gemmy armor--a delusive star of victory, riding, revengeful,
on the foremost crest of that wide, sparkling tide! hear, if you can,
all this, and where my powers fail, lend me the help of your bold
english fancy.

*       *       *       *       *

it was a hard-fought day indeed! hotly pursued by the french king,
numbering ourselves scarce thirty thousand men, while those behind us
were four times as many, we had fallen back down the green banks of the
somme, seeking in vain for a ford by which we might pass to the farther
shore. on this morning of which i write so near was philip and his vast
array that our rearguard, as we retreated slowly toward the north, saw
the sheen of the spear-tops and the color on whole fields of banners,
scarce a mile behind us. and every soldier knew that, unless we would
fight at disadvantage, with the river at our backs, we must cross it
before the sun was above our heads. swiftly our prickers scoured up and
down the banks, and many a strong yeoman waded out, only to find the
hostile water broad and deep; and thus, all that morning, with the
blare of philip's trumpets in our ears, we hunted about for a passage
and could not find it, the while the great glittering host came closing
up upon us like a mighty crescent stormcloud--a vast somber shadow,
limned and edged with golden gleams.

at noon we halted in a hollow, and the king's dark face was as stern
as stern could be. and first he turned and scowled like a lion at bay
upon the oncoming frenchmen, and then upon the broad tidal flood that
shut us in that trap. even the young prince at his right side scarce
knew what to say; while the clustering nobles stroked their beards
and frowned, and looked now upon the king and now upon the water. the
archers sat in idle groups down by the willows, and the scouts stood
idle on the hills. truth, 'twas a pause such as no soldier likes, but
when it was at the worst in came two men-at-arms dragging along a
reluctant peasant between them. they hauled him to the sovereign, and
then it was:

"please your mightiness, but this fellow knows a ford, and for a
handful of silver says he'll tell it."

"a handful of silver!" laughed the joyful king. "god! let him show us a
place where we can cross, and we will smother him with silver! on, good
fellow!--the ford! the ford! and come to us to-morrow morning and you
shall find him who has been friend to england may laugh henceforth at
sulky fortune!"

away we went down the sunburnt, grassy slopes, and ere the sun had gone
a hand-breadth to the west of his meridian a little hamlet came in
sight upon the farther shore, and, behind it a mile, pleasant ridges
trending up to woods and trees. down by the hamlet the river ran loose
and wide, and the ebbing stream (for it was near the sea) had just then
laid bare the new-wet, shingly flats, and as we looked upon them, with
a shout that went from line to line, we recognized deliverance. so
swift had been our coming that when the first dancing english plumes
shone on the august hill-tops the women were still out washing clothes
upon the stones, and when the english bowmen, all in king edward's
livery, came brushing through the copses, the kine were standing
knee-deep about the shallows, and the little urchins, with noise and
frolic, were bathing in the stream that presently ran deep and red with
blood. and small maids were weaving chaplets among those meadows where
kings and princes soon lay dying, and tumbling in their play about the
sunny meads, little wotting of the crop their fields would bear by
evening, or the stern harvest to be reaped from them before the moon
got up.

we crossed; but an army does not cross like one, and before our
rearward troops were over the french vanguard was on the hill-tops we
had just quitted, while the tide was flowing in strong again from the
outer sea.

"now, god be praised for this!" said king edward, as he sat his charger
and saw the strong salt water come gushing in as the last man toiled
through. "the kind heavens smile upon our arms--see! they have given us
a breathing space! you, good sir andrew kirkaby, who live by pleasant
sherwood, with a thousand archers stand here among the willow bushes
and keep the ford for those few minutes till it will remain. then,
while philip watches the gentle sea fill up this famous channel, and
waits, as he must wait, upon his opportunity, we will inland, and on
yonder hill, by the grace of god and sweet st. george, we will lay a
supper-place for him and his!"

so spoke the bold king, and turned his war-horse, and, with all
his troops--seeming wondrous few by comparison of the dusky swarms
gathering behind us--rode north four hundred yards from crecy. he
pitched upon a gentle ridge sloping down to a little brook, while at
top was woody cover for the baggage train, and near by, on the right,
a corn-mill on a swell. 'twas from that granary floor, sitting stern
and watchful, his sword upon his knees, his impatient charger armed and
ready at the door below, that the king sat and watched the long battle.

meanwhile, we strengthened the slopes. we dug a trench along the
front and sides, and, with the glitter of the close foeman's steel in
our eyes, lopped the crecy thickets. and, working in silence (while
the frenchman's song and laughter came to us on the breeze), set the
palisades, and bound them close as a strong fence against charging
squadrons, and piled our spears where they were handy, and put out the
archers' arrows in goodly heaps. jove! we worked as though each man's
life depended on it, the prince among us, sweating at spade and axe,
and then--it was near four o'clock on that august afternoon--a hush
fell upon both hosts, and we lay about and only spoke in whispers. and
you could hear the kine lowing in the valley a mile beyond, and the
lapwing calling from the new-shorn stubble, and the whimbrels on the
hill-tops, and the river fast emptying once again, now prattling to the
distant sea. 'twas a strange pause, a sullen, heavy silence, no longer
than a score of minutes. and then, all in a second, a little page in
the yellow fern in front of me leaped to his feet, and, screaming in
shrill treble that scared the feeding linnets from the brambles, tossed
his velvet cap upon the wind and cried:

"they come! they come, st. george! st. george for merry england!"

and up we all sprang to our feet, and, while the proud shout of
defiance ran thundering from end to end of our triple lines, a wondrous
sight unfolded before us. the vast array of france, stretching far to
right and left and far behind, was loosed from its roots, and coming
on down the slope--a mighty frowning avalanche--upon us, a flowing,
angry sea, wave behind wave, of chief and mercenary--countless lines
of spear and bowmen and endless ranks of men-at-arms behind--an
overwhelming flood that hid the country as it marched shot with the
lurid gleam of light upon its billows, and crested with the fluttering
of endless flags that crowned each of those long lines of cheering
foemen.

that tawny fringe there in front a furlong deep and driven on by the
host behind like the yellow running spume upon the lip of a flowing
tide was genoese crossbowmen, selling their mean carcasses to manure
the good picardy soil for hireling pay. far on the left rode the grim
doria, laughing to see the little band set out to meet his serried
vassals, and, on the right, grimaldi's olive face scowled hatred and
malice at the hill where the english lay.

there, behind these tawny mercenaries in endless waves of steel,
d'alençon rode, waving his princely baton, and marshaled as he came
rank upon rank of glittering chivalry--a fuming, foamy sea of spears
and helmets that flashed and glittered in the sun, and tossed and
chafed, impatient of ignoble hesitance, and flowed in stately pride
toward us, the white foam-streaks of twenty thousand plumed horsemen
showing like breakers on a shallow sea, as that great force, to the
blare of trumpets, swept down.

and, as though all these were not enough to smother our desperate valor
even with the shadow of their numbers, behind the french chivalry
again advanced a winding forest of spearmen stooping to the lie of the
ground, and now rising and now falling like water-reeds when the west
wind plays among them. under that innumerable host, that stretched
in dust and turmoil two long miles back to where the gray spires of
abbeville were misty on the sky, the rasp of countless feet sounded in
the still air like the rain falling on a leafy forest.

never did such a horde set out before to crush a desperate band of
raiders. and, that all the warlike show might not lack its head and
consummation, between their rearguard ranks came philip, the vassal
monarch who held the mighty fiefs that edward coveted. lord! how he and
his did shine and glint in the sunshine! how their flags did flutter
and their heralds blow as the resplendent group--a deep, strong ring
of peers and princes curveting in the flickering shade of a score of
mighty blazons--came over the hill crest and rode out to the foremost
line of battle and took places there to see the english lion flayed.
with a mighty shout--a portentous roar from rear to front which
thundered along their van and died away among the host behind--the
french heralded the entry of their king upon the field, and, with one
fatal accord, the whole vast baying pack broke loose from order and
restraint and came at us.

we stood aghast to see them. fools! madmen! they swept down to the
river--a hundred thousand horse and footmen bent upon one narrow
passage--and rushed in, every chief and captain scrambling with his
neighbor to be first--troops, squadrons, ranks, all lost in one
seething crowd--disordered, unwarlike. and thus--quivering and chaotic,
heaving with the stress of its own vast bulk--under a hundred jealous
leaders, the great army rushed upon us.

while they struggled thus, out galloped king edward to our front,
bareheaded, his jeweled warden staff held in his mailed fist, and,
riding down our ranks, and checking the wanton fire of that gray
charger, which curveted and proudly bent his glossy neck in answer to
our cheering, proud, calm-eyed, and happy, king edward spoke:

"my dear comrades and lieges linked with me in this adventure--you,
my gallant english peers, whose shiny bucklers are the bright bulwarks
of our throne, whose bold spirits and matchless constancy have made
this just quarrel possible--oh! well i know i need not urge you to that
valor which is your native breath. right well i know how true your
hearts do beat under their steely panoply; and there is false philip
watching you, and here am i! yonder, behind us, the gray sea lies, and
if we fall or fail it will be no broader for them than 'tis for us.
stand firm to-day, then, dear friends and cousins! remember, every blow
that's struck is struck for england, every foot you give of this fair
hillside presages the giving of an ell of england. remember, philip's
hungry hordes, like ragged lurchers in the slip, are lean with waiting
for your patrimonies. remember all this, and stand as strong to-day
for me as i and mine shall stand for you. and you, my trusty english
yeomen," said the soldier king--"you whose strong limbs were grown in
pleasant england--oh! show me here the mettle of those same pastures!
god! when i do turn from yonder hireling sea of shiny steel and mark
how square your sturdy valor stands unto it--how your clear english
eyes do look unfaltering into that yeasty flood of treachery--why, i
would not one single braggart yonder the less for you to lop and drive;
i would not have that broad butt that philip sets for us to shoot at
the narrower by one single coward tunic! yonder, i say, ride the lank,
lusty frenchmen who thirst to reeve your acres and father to-morrow,
if so they may, your waiting wives and children. to it, then, dear
comrades--upon them, for king edward and for fair england's honor!
strike home upon these braggart bullies who would heir the lion's den
even while the lion lives; strike for st. george and england! and may
god judge now 'tween them and us!"

as the king finished, five thousand english archers went forward in a
long gray line, and, getting into shot of the first ranks of the enemy,
drew out their long bows from their cowhide cases and set the bow-feet
to the ground and bent and strung them; and then it would have done
you good to see the glint of the sunshine on the hail of arrows that
swept the hillside and plunged into those seething ranks below. the
close-massed foemen writhed and winced under that remorseless storm.
the genoese in front halted and slung their crossbows, and fired whole
sheaves of bolts upon us, that fell as stingless as reed javelins on a
village green, for a passing rainstorm had wet their bowstrings and the
slack sinews scarce sent a bolt inside our fences, while every shaft we
sped plunged deep and fatal. loud laughed the english archers at this,
and plied their biting flights of arrows with fierce energy; and, all
in wild confusion, the mercenaries yelled and screamed and pulled their
ineffectual weapons, and, stern shut off from advance by the flying
rain of good gray shafts, and crushed from behind by the crowding
throng, tossed in wild confusion, and broke and fled.

then did i see a sight to spoil a soldier's dreams. as the coward
bowmen fell back, the men-at-arms behind them, wroth to be so long shut
off the foe, and pressed in turn by the troops in rear, fell on them,
and there, under our eyes, we saw the first rank of philip's splendid
host at war with the second; we saw the billmen of fair bascquerard and
bruneval lop down the olive mercenaries from roquemaure and the cities
of the midland sea; we saw the savage genoese falcons rip open the
gay livery of lyons and bayonne, and all the while our shafts rained
thick and fast among them, and men fell dead by scores in that hideous
turmoil--and none could tell whether 'twas friends or foes that slew
them.

a wonderful day, indeed; but hard was the fighting ere it was done.
my poor pen fails before all the crowded incident that comes before
me, all the splendid episodes of a stirring combat, all the glitter
and joy and misery, the proud exultation of that august morning and
the black chagrin of its evening. truth! but you must take as said a
hundred times as much as i can tell you, and line continually my bare
suggestions with your generous understanding.

well, though our archers stood the first brunt, the day was not left
all to them. soon the french footmen, thirsting for vengeance, had
overriden and trampled upon their genoese allies, and came at us up
the slope, driving back our skirmishers as the white squall drives the
wheeling seamews before it, and surged against our palisades, and came
tossing and glinting down upon our halberdiers. the loud english cheer
echoed the wild yelling of the southerners: bill and pike, and sword
and mace and dagger sent up a thunderous roar all down our front, while
overhead the pennons gleamed in the dusty sunlight, and the carrion
crows wheeled and laughed with hungry pleasure above that surging line.
gods! 'twas a good shock, and the crimson blood went smoking down to
the rivulets, and the savage scream of battle went up into the sky as
that long front of ours, locked fast in the burnished arms of france,
heaved and strove, and bent now this way and now that, like some
strong, well-matched wrestlers.

a good shock indeed! a wild tremendous scene of confusion there on
the long grass of that autumn hill, with the dark woods behind on the
ridge, and, down in front, the babbling river and the smoking houses
of the ruined village. so vast was the extent of philip's array that
at times we saw it extend far to right and left of us; and so deep was
it, that we who battled amid the thunder of its front could hear a mile
back to their rear the angry hum of rage and disappointment as the
chaotic troops, in the bitterness of the spreading confusion, struggled
blindly to come at us. their very number was our salvation. that half
of the great army which had safely crossed the stream lay along outside
our palisades like some splendid, writhing, helpless monster, and the
long swell of their dead-locked masses, the long writhe of their fatal
confusion, you could see heaving that glittering tide like the golden
pulse of a summer sea pent up in a crescent shore. and we were that
shore! all along our front the stout, unblenching english yeomen stood
to it--the white english tunic was breast to breast with the leathern
kirtles of genoa and turin. before the frightful blows of those
stalwart pikemen the yellow mail of the gay troopers of châteauroux
and besaçon crackled like dry december leaves; the rugged boar-skins
on the wide shoulders of vosges peasants were less protection against
their fiery thrust than a thickness of lady's lawn. down they lopped
them, one and all, those strong, good english hedgemen, till our
bloody foss was full--full of olive mercenaries from tarascon and
arles--full of writhing bisc and hideous screaming genoese. and still
we slew them, shoulder to shoulder, foot to foot, and still they
swarmed against us, while we piled knight and vassal, serf and master,
princeling and slave, all into that ditch in front. the fair young boy
and gray-bearded sire, the freeman and the serf, the living and the
dead, all went down together, till a broad rampart stretched along our
swinging, shouting front, and the glittering might of france surged up
to that human dam and broke upon it like the futile waves, and went to
pieces, and fell back under the curling yellow stormcloud of mid-battle.

meanwhile, on right and left, the day was fiercely fought. far upon
the one hand the wild irish kerns were repelling all the efforts of
beaupreau's light footmen, and pulling down the gay horsemen of fair
bourges by the distant loire. three times those squadrons were all
among them, and three times the wild red sons of shannon and the dim
atlantic hills fell on them like the wolves of their own rugged glens,
and hamstrung the sleek southern chargers, and lopped the fallen
riders, and repelled each desperate foray, making war doubly hideous
with their clamor and the bloody scenes of butchery that befell among
their prisoners after each onset.

and, on the other crescent of our battle, my dear, tuneful, licentious
welshmen were out upon the slope, driving off with their native ardor
one and all that came against them, and, worked up to a fine fury by
their chanting minstrels, whose shrill piping came ever and anon upon
the wind, they pressed the southerners hard, and again and again drove
them down the hill--a good, a gallant crew that i have ever liked, with
half a dozen vices and a score of virtues! i had charged by them one
time in the day, and, cantering back with my troop behind their ranks,
i saw a young welsh chieftain on a rock beside himself with valor and
battle. he was leaping and shouting as none but a welshman could or
would, and beating his sword upon his round cymric shield, the while he
yelled to his fighting vassals below a fierce old british battle song.
oh! it was very strange for me, pent in that shining plantagenet mail,
to listen to those wild, hot words of scorn and hatred--i who had heard
those words so often when the ancestors of that chanting boy were not
begotten--i who had heard those fiery verses sung in the red confusion
of forgotten wars--i who could not help pulling a rein a moment as that
song of exultation, full of words and phrases none but i could fully
understand, swelled up through the eddying war-dust over the welshmen's
reeling line. i, so strong and young; i, who yet was more ancient
than the singer's vaguest traditions--i stopped a moment and listened
to him, full of remembrance and sad wonder, while the pæan-dirge of
victory and death swelled to the sky over the clamor of the combat.
and then--as a mavis drops into the covert when his morning song is
done--the welshman finished, and, mad with the wine of battle, leaped
straight into the tossing sea below, and was engulfed and swallowed up
like a white spume-flake on the bosom of a wave.

for three long hours the battle raged from east to west, and men fought
foot to foot and hand to hand, and 'twas stab and hack and thrust,
and the pounding of ownerless horses and the wail of dying men, and
the husky cries of captains, and the interminable clash of steel on
steel, so that no man could see all the fight at once, save the good
king alone, who sat back there at his vantage-point. it was all this, i
say; and then, about seven in the afternoon, when the sun was near his
setting, it seemed, all in a second, as though the whole west were in
a glow, and there was lord alençon sweeping down upon our right with
the splendid array of philip's chivalry, their pennons a-dance above
and their endless ranks of spears in serried ranks below. there was no
time to think, it seemed. a wild shout of fear and wonder went up from
the english host. our reserves were turned to meet the new danger; the
archers poured their gray-goose shafts upon the thundering squadrons;
princes and peers and knights were littered on the road that brilliant
host was treading--and then they were among the english yeomen with a
frightful crash of flesh and blood and horse and steel that drowned
all other sound of battle with its cruel import! jove! what strong
stuff the english valor is! those good saxon countrymen, sure in the
confidence of our great brotherhood, kept their line under that hideous
shock as though each fought for a crown, and, shoulder to shoulder
and hand to hand, an impenetrable living wall derided the terrors of
the golden torrent that burst upon them. happy king to yield such
stuff--thrice-happy country that can rear it! in vain wave upon wave
burst upon those hardy islanders, in vain the stern voice of alençon
sent rank after rank of proud lords and courtly gallants upon those
rugged english husbandmen--they would not move, and when they would not
the frenchmen hesitated.

'twas our moment! i had had my leave just then new from the king, and
did not need it twice. i saw the great front of french cavalry heaving
slow upon our hither face, galled by the arrow-rain that never ceased,
and irresolute whether to come on once again or go back, and i turned
to the cohort of my dear veterans. i do not know what i said, the
voice came thick and husky in my throat, i could but wave my iron mace
above my head and point to the frenchmen. and then all those good gray
spears went down as though 'twere one hand that lowered them, and all
the chargers moved at once. i led them round the english front, and
there, clapping spurs to our ready coursers' flanks, five hundred of
us, knit close together, with one heart beating one measure, shot out
into array, and, sweeping across the slope, charged boldly ten thousand
frenchmen!

we raced across the crecy slope, drinking the fierce wine of expectant
conflict with every breath, our straining chargers thundering in
tumultuous rhythm over the short space between, and, in another minute,
we broke upon the foemen. bravely they met us. they turned when we
were two hundred paces distant, and advancing with their silken fleur
de lys, and pricking up their chargers, weary with pursuit and battle,
they came at us as you will see a rock-thwarted wave run angry back
to meet another strong incoming surge. and as those two waves meet,
and toss and leap together, and dash their strength into each other,
the while the white spume flies away behind them, and, with thunderous
arrogance, the stronger bursts through the other and goes streaming
on triumphant through all the white boil and litter of the fight, so
fell we on those princelings. 'twas just a blinding crash, the coming
together of two great walls of steel! i felt i was being lifted like
a dry leaf on the summit of that tremendous conjunction, and i could
but ply my mace blindly on those glittering casques that shone all
round me, and, i now remember, cracked under its meteor sweep like ripe
nuts under an urchin's hammer. so dense were the first moments of that
shock of chivalry that even our horses fought. i saw my own charger
rip open the glossy neck of another that bore a frenchman; and near
by--though i thought naught of it then--a great black flemish stallion,
mad with battle, had a wounded soldier in its teeth, and was worrying
and shaking him as a lurcher worries a screaming leveret. so dense was
the throng we scarce could ply our weapons, and one dead knight fell
right athwart my saddle-bow; and a flying hand, lopped by some mighty
blow, still grasping the hilt of a broken blade, struck me on the helm;
the warm red blood spurting from a headless trunk half blinded me--and,
all the time, overhead the french lilies kept stooping at the english
lion, and now one went down and then the other, and the roar of the
host went up into the sky, and the dust and turmoil, the savage uproar,
the unheard, unpitied shriek of misery and the cruel exultation of the
victor, and then--how soon i know not--we were traveling!

ah! by the great god of battles, we were moving--and forward--the
mottled ground was slipping by us--and the french were giving! i rose
in my stirrups, and, hoarse as any raven that ever dipped a black wing
in the crimson pools of battle, shouted to my veterans. it did not
need! i had fought least well of any in that grim company, and now,
with one accord, we pushed the foeman hard. we saw the great roan
flanders jennets slide back upon their haunches, and slip and plunge
in the purple quagmire we had made, and then--each like a good ship
well freighted--lurch and go down, and we stamped beribboned horse and
jeweled rider alike into the red frothy marsh under our hoofs. and the
fleur de lys sank, and the silver roe of mayenne, proud montereau's
azure falcon, and the white crescent of donzenac went down, and
bernay's yellow cornsheaf and sarreburg's golden blazon, with many
another gaudy pennon, and then, somehow, the foemen broke and dissolved
before our heavy, foam-streaked chargers, and, as we gasped hot breath
through our close helmet-bars, there came a clear space before us, with
flying horsemen scouring off on every hand.

the day was wellnigh won, and i could see that far to left the english
yeomen were driving the scattered clouds of philip's footmen pell-mell
down the hill, and then we went again after his horsemen, who were
gathering sullenly upon the lower slopes. over the grass we scoured
like a brown whirlwind, and in a minute were all among the french
lordlings. and down they went, horse and foot, riders and banners,
crowding and crushing each other in a confusion terrible to behold, now
suffering even more from their own chaos than from our lances. jove!
brother trod brother down that day, and comrade lay heaped on living
comrade under that red confusion. the pennons--such as had outlived
the storm so far--were all entangled sheaves, and sank, whole stocks
at once, into the floundering sea below. and kings and princes, hinds
and yeomen, gasped and choked and glowered at us, so fast-locked in the
deadly wedge that went slowly roaring back before our fiery onsets,
they could not move an arm or foot!

the tale is nearly told. everywhere the english were victorious, and
the frenchmen fell in wild dismay before them. many a bold attempt
they made to turn the tide, and many a desperate sally and gallant
stand the fading daylight witnessed. the old king of bohemia, to whom
daylight and night were all as one, with fifty knights, their reins
knotted fast together, charged us, and died, one and all, like the good
soldiers that they were. and philip, over yonder, wrung his white hands
and pawned his revenue in vows to the unmoved saints; and the soft,
braggart peers that crowded round him gnawed their lips and frowned,
and looked first at the ruined, smoldering fight, then back--far
back--to where, in the south, friendly evening was already holding out
to them the dusky cover of the coming night. it was a good day indeed,
and may england at her need ever fight so well!

would that i might in this truthful chronicle have turned to other
things while the long roar of exultation goes up from famous crecy and
the strong wine of well-deserved victory filled my heart! alas! there
is that to tell which mars the tale and dims the shine of conquest.

already thirty thousand frenchmen were slain, and the long swathes lay
all across the swelling ground like the black rims of weed when the sea
goes back. only here and there the battle still went on, where groups
and knots of men were fighting, and i, with my good comrade flamaucœur,
now, at sunset, was in such a mêlée on the right. all through the day
he had been like a shadow to me--and shame that i have said so little
of it! where i went there he was, flitting in his close gray armor
close behind me; quick, watchful, faithful, all through the turmoil and
dusty war-mist; escaping, heaven knows how, a thousand dangers; riding
his light war-horse down the bloody lanes of war as he ever rode it, as
if they two were one; gentle, retiring, more expert in parrying thrust
and blow than in giving--that dear friend of mine, with a heart made
stout by consuming love against all its native fears, had followed me.

and now the spent battle went smoldering out, and we there thought
'twas all extinguished, when, all on a sudden--i tell it less briefly
than it happened--a desperate band of foemen bore down on us, and, as
we joined, my charger took a hurt, and went crashing over, and threw
me full into the rank tangle of the under fight. thereon the yeomen,
seeing me fall, set up a cry, and, with a rush, bore the frenchmen four
spear-lengths back, and lifted me, unhurt, from the littered ground.
they gave me a sword, and, as i turned, from the foemen's ranks, waving
a beamy sword, plumed by a towering crest of nodding feathers and
covered by a mighty shield, a gigantic warrior stepped out. hoth! i can
see him now, mad with defeat and shame, striding on foot toward us--a
giant in glittering, pearly armor, that shone and glittered as the last
rays of the level sun against the black backing of the evening sky, as
though its wearer had been the archangel gabriel himself! it did not
need to look upon him twice: 'twas the lord high constable of france
himself--the best swordsman, the sternest soldier, and the brightest
star of chivalry in the whole french firmament. and if that noble peer
was hot for fight, no less was i. stung by my fall, and glorying in
such a foeman, i ran to meet him, and there, in a little open space,
while our soldiers leaned idly on their weapons and watched, we fought.
the first swoop of the great constable's humming falchion lit slanting
on my shield and shore my crest. then i let out, and the blow fell on
his shield, and sent the giant staggering back, and chipped the pretty
quarterings of a hundred ancestors from that gilded target. at it
again we went, and round and round, raining our thunderous blows upon
each other with noise like boulders crashing down a mountain valley.
i did not think there was a man within the four seas who could have
stood against me so long as that fierce and bulky frenchman did. for
a long time we fought so hard and stubborn that the blood-miry soil
was stamped into a circle where we went round and round, raining our
blows so strong, quick, and heavy that the air was full of tumult,
and glaring at each other over our morion bars, while our burnished
scales and links flew from us at every deadly contact, and the hot
breath steamed into the air, and the warm, smarting blood crept from
between our jointed harness. yet neither would bate a jot, but, with
fiery hearts and heaving breasts and pain-bursting muscles, kept to it,
and stamped round and round those grimy, steaming lists, redoubtable,
indomitable, and mad with the lust of killing.

and then--jove! how near spent i was!--the great constable, on a
sudden, threw away his many-quartered shield, and, whirling up his
sword with both hands high above his head, aimed a frightful blow
at me. no mortal blade or shield or helmet could have withstood
that mighty stroke! i did not try, but, as it fell, stepped nimbly
back--'twas a good saxon trick, learned in the distant time--and then,
as the falchion-point buried itself a foot deep in the ground, and the
giant staggered forward, i flew at him like a wild cat, and through the
close helmet-bars, through teeth and skull and the three-fold solid
brass behind, thrust my sword so straight and fiercely, the smoking
point came two feet out beyond his nape, and, with a lurch and cry, the
great peer tottered and fell dead before me.

now comes that thing to which all other things are little, the fellest
gleam of angry steel of all the steel that had shone since noon, the
cruelest stab of ten thousand stabs, the bitterest cry of any that had
marred the full yellow circle of that august day! i had dropped on one
knee by the champion, and, taking his hand, had loosed his visor, and
shouted to two monks, who were pattering with bare feet about the field
(for, indeed, i was sorry, if perchance any spark of life remained, so
brave a knight should die unshriven to his contentment), and thus was
forgotten for the moment the fight, the confronting rows of foemen,
and how near i was to those who had seen their great captain fall by
my hands. miserable, accursed oversight! i had not knelt by my fallen
enemy a moment, when suddenly my men set up a cry behind me, there was
a rush of hoofs, and, ere i could regain my feet or snatch my sword or
shield, a great black french rider, like a shadowy fury dropped from
the sullen evening sky, his plumes all streaming behind him, his head
low down between his horse's ears, and his long blue spear in rest,
was thundering in mid career against me not a dozen paces distant. as
i am a soldier, and have lived many ages by my sword, that charge must
have been fatal. and would that it had been! how can i write it? even
as i started to my feet, before i could lift a brand or offer one light
parry to that swift, keen point, the horseman was upon me. and as he
closed, as that great vengeance-driven tower of steel and flesh loomed
above me, there was a scream--a wild scream of fear and love--(and
i clap my hands to my ears now, centuries afterward, to deaden the
undying vibrations of that sound)--and flamaucœur had thrown himself
'tween me and the spear-point, had taken it, fenceless, unwarded, full
in his side, and i saw the cruel shaft break off short by his mail as
those four, both horses and both riders, went headlong to the ground.

up rose the english with an angry shout, and swept past us, killing
the black champion as they went, and driving the french before them
far down into the valley. then ran i to my dear comrade, and knelt and
lifted him against my knee. he had swooned, and i groaned in bitterness
and fear when i saw the strong red tide that was pulsing from his
wound and quilting his bright english armor. with quick, nervous
fingers--bursting such rivets as would not yield, all forgetful of his
secret, and that i had never seen him unhelmed before--i unloosed his
casque, and then gently drew it from his head.

with a cry i dropped the great helm, and wellnigh let even my fair
burden fall, for there, against my knee, her white, sweet face against
my iron bosom, her fair yellow hair, that had been coiled in the
emptiness of her helmet, all adrift about us, those dear curled lips
that had smiled so tender and indulgent on me, her gentle life ebbing
from her at every throe, was not flamaucœur, the unknown knight, the
foolish and lovesick boy, but that wayward, luckless girl isobel of
oswaldston herself!

and if i had been sorry for my companion in arms, think how the pent
grief and surprise filled my heart, as there, dying gently in my arms,
was the fair girl whom, by a tardy, late-born love, new sprung into my
empty heart, i had come to look upon as the point of my lonely world,
my fair heritage in an empty epoch, for the asking!

soon she moved a little, and sighed, and looked up straight into my
eyes. as she did so the color burnt for a moment with a pale glow in
her cheeks, and i felt the tremor of her body as she knew her secret
was a secret no longer. she lay there bleeding and gasping painfully
upon my breast, and then she smiled and pulled my plumed head down to
her and whispered:

"you are not angry?"

angry? gods! my heart was heavier than it had been all that day of
dint and carnage, and my eyes were dim and my lips were dry with a
knowledge of the coming grief as i bent and kissed her. she took the
kiss unresisting, as though it were her right, and gasped again:

"and you understand now all--everything? why i ransomed the french
maiden? why i would not write for thee to thy unknown mistress?"

"i know--i know, sweet girl!"

"and you bear no ill-thought of me?"

"the great heaven you believe in be my witness, sweet isobel! i love
you, and know of nothing else!"

she lay back upon me, seeming to sleep for a moment or two, then
started up and clapped her hands to her ears, as if to shut out the
sound of bygone battle that no doubt was still thundering through them,
then swooned again, while i bent in sorrow over her and tried in vain
to soothe and stanch the great wound that was draining out her gentle
life.

she lay so still and white that i thought she were already dead; but
presently, with a gasp, her eyes opened, and she looked wistfully to
where the western sky was hanging pale over the narrow english sea.

"how far to england, dear friend?"

"a few leagues of land and water, sweet maid!"

"could i reach it, dost thou think?" but then, on an instant, shaking
her head, she went on: "nay, do not answer; i was foolish to ask. oh!
dearest, dearest sister alianora! my father--my gentlest father! oh!
tell them, sir, from me--and beg them to forgive!" and she lay back
white upon my shoulder.

she lay, breathing slow, upon me for a spell, then, on a sudden, her
fair fingers tightened in my mailed hand, and she signed that she would
speak again.

"remember that i loved thee!" whispered isobel, and, with those last
words, the yellow head fell back upon my shoulder, the blue eyes
wavered and sank, and her spirit fled.

*       *       *       *       *

back by the lines of gleeful shouting troops--back by where the
laughing english knights, with visors up, were talking of the day's
achievements--back by where the proud king, hand in hand with his
brave boy, was thanking the south english yeomen for crecy and another
kingdom--back by where the champing, foamy chargers were picketed in
rows--back by the knots of archers, all, like honest workmen, wiping
down their unstrung bows--back by groups of sullen prisoners and gaudy
heaps of captured pennons, we passed.

in front four good yeomen bore isobel upon their trestled spears;
then came i, bareheaded--i, kinsmanless, to her in all that camp the
only kin; and then our drooping chargers, empty-saddled, led by young
squires behind, and seeming--good beasts!--to sniff and scent the
sorrow of that fair burden on ahead. so we went through the victorious
camp to our lodgment, and there they placed isobel on her bare soldier
couch, her feet to the door of her soldier tent, and left us.

chapter xvi

unwashed, unfed, my dinted armor on me still--battle-stained and
rent--unhelmeted, ungloved, my sword and scabbard cast by my hollow
shield in a dark corner of the tent, i watched, tearless and stern,
all that night by the bier of the pale white girl who had given so
much for me and taken so poor a reward. i, who, so fanciful and
wayward, had thought i might safely toy with the sweet tender of her
affection--sprung how or why i knew not--and take or leave it as
seemed best to my convenience, brooded, all the long black watch, over
that gentle broken vessel that lay there white and still before me,
alike indifferent to gifts or giving. and now and then i would start up
from the stool i had drawn near to her, and pace, with bent head and
folded arms, the narrow space, remembering how warm the rising tide of
love had been flowing in my heart for that fair dead thing so short
a time before. "so short a time before!" why, it was but yesterday
that she wrote for me that missive to herself: and i, fool and blind,
could not read the light that shone behind those gray visor-bars as
she penned the lines, or translate the tremor that shook that sweet
scribe's fingers, or recognize the heave of the maiden bosom under
its steel and silk! i groaned in shame and grief, and bent over her,
thinking how dear things might have been had they been otherwise, and
loving her no whit the less because she was so cold, immovable, saying
i know not what into her listless ear, and nourishing in loneliness and
solitude, all those long hours, the black flower of the love that was
alight too late in my heart.

i would not eat or rest, though my dinted armor was heavy as lead upon
my spent and weary limbs--though the leather jerkin under that was
stiff with blood and sweat, and opened my bleeding wounds each time i
moved. i would not be eased of one single smart, i thought--let the
cursed seams and gashes sting and bite, and my hot flesh burn beneath
them! mayhap 'twould ease the bitter anger of my mind--and i repulsed
all those who came with kind or curious eyes to the tent door, and
would not hear of ease or consolation. even the king came down, and, in
respect to that which was within, dismounted and stood like a simple
knight without, asking if he might see me. but i would not share my
sorrow with any one, and sent the page who brought me word that the
king was standing in the porch to tell him so; and, accomplished in
courtesy as in war, the victorious monarch bent his head, and mounted,
and rode silently back to his own lodging.

the gay gallants who had known me came on the whisper of the camp
one by one (though all were hungry and weary), and lifted the flap a
little, and said something such as they could think of, and peered at
me, grimly repellent, in the shadows, and peeped curiously at that fair
white soldier lain on the trestles in her knightly gear so straight and
trim, and went away without daring to approach more nearly. my veterans
clipped their jolly soldier-songs, though they had well deserved
them, and took their suppers silently by the flickering camp-fire.
once they sent him among them that i was known to like the best with
food and wine and clean linen, but i would not have it, and the good
soldier put them down on one side of the door and went back as gladly
as he who retreats skin-whole from the cave where a bear keeps watch
and ward. last of all there came the fall of quieter feet upon the
ground, and, in place of the clank of soldier harness, the rattle of
the beads of rosaries and cross; and, looking out, there was the king's
own chaplain, bareheaded, and three gray friars behind him. i needed
ghostly comfort just then as little as i needed temporal, and at first
i thought to repulse them surlily; but, reflecting that the maid had
ever been devout and held such men as these in high esteem, i suffered
them to enter, and stood back while they did by her the ceremonial of
their office. they made all smooth and fair about, and lit candles
at her feet and gave her a crucifix, and sprinkled water, and knelt,
throwing their great black shadows athwart the white shrine of my dear
companion, the while they told their beads and the chaplain prayed.
when they had done, the priest rose and touched me on the arm.

"son," he said, "the king has given an earl's ransom to be expended in
masses for thy leman's soul."

"father," i replied, "tender the king my thanks for what was well meant
and as princely generous as becomes him. but tell him all the prayers
thy convent could count from now till the great ending would not bleach
this white maid's soul an atom whiter. earn your ransom if you will,
but not here; leave me to my sorrow."

"i will give your answer, soldier; but these holy brothers--the king
wished it--must stay and share your vigil until the morning. it is
their profession; their prayerful presence can ward off the spirits of
darkness; weariness never sits on their eyes as it sits now on thine.
let them stay with thee; it is only fit."

"not for another ransom, priest! i will not brook their confederate
tears--i will not wing this fair girl's soul with their hireling
prayers--out, good fellows, my mood is wondrous short, and i would not
willing do that which to-morrow i might repent of."

"but, brother" said one monk, gently.

"hence--hence! i have no brothers--go! can you look on me here in this
extremity, can you see my hacked and bleeding harness, and the shine
of bitter grief in my eyes, and stand pattering there of prayers and
sympathy? out! out! or by every lying relic in thy cloisters i add some
other saints to thy chapter rolls!"

they went, and as the tent-flap dropped behind them and the sound of
their sandaled feet died softly away into the gathering night, i turned
sorrowful and sad to my watch. i drew a stool to the maiden bier, and
sat and took her hand, so white and smooth and cold, and looked at the
fair young face that death had made so passionless--that sweet mirror
upon which, the last time we had been together in happiness, the rosy
light of love was shining and sweet presumption and maiden shame were
striving. and as i looked and held her hand the dim tent-walls fell
away, and the painted lists rose up before me, and the littered flowers
my quick, curveting charger stamped into the earth, and the blare of
the heralds' trumpets, the flutter of the ribbons and the gay tires of
brave lords and fair ladies all centered round the daïs where those
two fair sisters sat. gods! was that long sigh the night-wind circling
about my tent-flap or in truth the sigh of slighted isobel, as i rode
past her chair with the victor's circlet on my spear-point and laid it
at the footstool of her sister?

i bent over that fair white corpse, so sick in mind and body that
all the real was unreal and all the unreal true. i saw the painted
pageantry of her father's hall again and the colored reflections of the
blazoned windows on the polished corridors shine upon our dim and sandy
floor, and down the long vistas of my aching memory the groups of men
and women moved in a motley harmony of color--a fair shifting mosaic
of pattern and hue and light that radiated and came back ever to those
two fair english girls. i heard the rippling laughter on courtly lips,
the whispered jest of gallants, and the thoughtless glee of damsels.
i heard the hum and smooth praise that circled round the black elder
sister's chair, and at my elbow the father, saying, "my daughter; my
daughter isobel!" and started up, to find myself alone, and that sweet
horrid thing there in the low flickering taper-light unmoved, unmovable.

i sat again, and presently the wavering shadows spread out into the
likeness of great cedar branches casting their dusky shelter over the
soft, sweet-scented ground; and, as the hushed air swayed to and fro
those great velvet screens, isobel stepped from them, all in white,
and ran to me, and stopped, and clapped her hands before her eyes
and on her throbbing bosom--then stretched those trembling fingers,
beseechingly to me fresh from that sweet companionship--then down upon
her knees and clipped me round with her fair white arms and turned back
her head and looked upon me with wild, wet, yearning eyes and cheeks
that burned for love and shame. i would not have it; i laughed with the
bitter mockingness of one possessed by another love, and unwound those
ivory bonds and pushed the fair maid back, and there against the dusk
of leaf and branch she stood and wrung her fingers and beat her breast
and spoke so sweet and passionate, that even my icy mood half thawed
under the white light of her reckless love, and i let her take my hand
and hold and rain hot kisses on it and warm pattering tears, till all
the strength was running from me, and i half turned and my fingers
closed on hers--but, gods! how cold they were! and with a stifled cry i
woke again in the little tent, to find my hand fast locked in the icy
fingers of the dead.

it was a long, weary night, and, sad as was my watch and hectic as
the visions which swept through my heavy head, i would not quicken
by one willing hour of sleep the sad duties of that gray to-morrow
which i knew must come. at times i sat and stared into the yellow
tapers, living the brief spell of my last life again--all the episode
and change, all the hurry and glitter, and unrest that was forever
my portion--and then, in spite of resolution, i would doze to other
visions, outlined more brightly on the black background of oblivion;
and then i started up, my will all at war with tired nature's sweet
insistence, and paced in weary round our canvas cell, solitary but for
those teeming thoughts and my own black shadow, which stalked, sullen
and slow, ever beside me.

but who can deride the great mother for long? 'twas sleep i needed,
and she would have it; and so it came presently upon my heavy
eyelids--strong, deep sleep as black and silent as the abyss of the
nether world. my head sank upon my arm, my arm upon the foot of the
velvet bier, and there, in my mail, under the thin taper-light, worn
out with battle and grief, i slept.

i know not how long it was, some hours most likely, but after a time
the strangest feeling took possession of me in that slumber, and a fine
ethereal terror, purged of gross material fear, possessed my spirit. i
awoke--not with the pleasant drowsiness which marks refreshment, but
wide and staring, and my black phrygian hair, without the cause of
sight or sound, stood stiff upon my head, for something was moving in
the silent tent.

i glared around, yet nothing could be seen: the lights were low in
their sockets, but all else was in order: my piled shield and helmet
lay there in the shadows, our warlike implements and gear were all as
i had seen them last, no noise or vision broke the blank, and yet--and
yet--a coward chill sat on me, for here and there was moving something
unseen, unheard, unfelt by outer senses. i rose, and, fearful and yet
angry to be cowed by a dreadful nothing, stared into every corner and
shadow, but naught was there. then i lifted a dim taper, and held it
over the face of the dead girl and stared amazed! were it given to
mortals to die twice, that girl had! but a short time before and her
sweet face had worn the reflection of that dreadful day: there was a
pallid fright and pain upon it we could not smooth away, and now some
wonderful strange thing had surely happened, and all the unrest was
gone, all the pained dissatisfaction and frightened wonder. the maid
was still and smooth and happy-looking. hoth! as i bent over her she
looked just as one might look who reads aright some long enigma and
finds relief with a sigh from some hard problem. she slept so wondrous
still and quiet, and looked so marvelous fair now, and contented, that
it purged my fear, and, strong in that fair presence--how could i be
else?--i sat, and after a time, though you may wonder at it, i slept
again.

i dozed and dozed and dozed, in happy forgetfulness of the present
while the black night wore on to morning, and the last faint flushes of
the priestly tapers played softly in their sockets; and then again i
started up with every nerve within me thrilling, my clenched fists on
my knees, and my wide eyes glaring into the mid gloom, for that strange
nothing was moving gently once more about us, fanning me, it seemed,
with the rhythmed swing of unseen draperies, circling in soft cadenced
circles here and there, mute, voiceless, presenceless, and yet so real
and tangible to some unknown inner sense that hailed it from within me
that i could almost say that now 'twas here and now 'twas there, and
locate it with trembling finger, although, in truth, nothing moved or
stirred.

i looked at the maid. she was as she had been; then into every dusky
place and corner, but nothing showed; then rose and walked to the
tent-flap and lifted it and looked out. down in the long valley below
the somber shadows were seamed by the winding of the pale river; and
all away on the low meadows, piled thick and deep with the black
mounds of dead foemen, the pale marsh lights were playing amid the
corpses--leaping in ghostly fantasy from rank to rank, and heap to
heap, coalescing, separating, shining, vanishing, all in the unbroken
twilight silence. and those somber fields below were tapestried with
the thin wisps of white mist that lay in the hollows, and were shredded
out into weird shapes and forms over the black bosom of the near-spent
night. up above, far away in the east, where the low hills lay flat
in the distance, the lappet fringe of the purple sky was dipped in the
pale saffron of the coming sun, and overhead a few white stars were
shining, and now and then the swart, almost unseen wings of a raven
went gently beating through the star-lit void; and as i watched, i saw
him and his brothers check over the crecy ridges and with hungry croak,
like black spirits, circle round and drop one after another through the
thin white veils of vapor that shrouded prince, chiefs, and vassals,
peer and peasant, in those deep long swathes of the black harvest we
cut, but left ungarnered, yesterday. near around me the english camp
was all asleep, tired and heavy with the bygone battle, the listless
pickets on the misty, distant mounds hung drooping over their piled
spears, the metaled chargers' heads were all asag, they were so weary
as they stood among the shadows by their untouched fodder, and the
damp pennons and bannerets over the knightly porches scarce lifted on
the morning air! that air came cool and sad yonder from the english
sea, and wandered melancholy down our lifeless, empty canvas streets,
lifting the loose tent-flaps, and sighing as it strayed among the
sleeping groups, stirring with its unseen feet the white ashes of
the dead camp-fires, the only moving presence in all the place--sad,
silent, and listless. i dropped the hangings over the chill morning
glimmer, the camp of sleeping warriors and dusty valley of the dead,
and turned again to my post. i was not sleepy now, nor afraid--even
though as i entered a draught of misty outer air entered with me and
the last atom of the priestly taper shone fitful and yellow for a
moment upon the dead isobel, and then went out.

i sat down by the maid in the chill dark, and looked sadly on the
ground, the while my spirits were as low as you may well guess, and
the wind went moaning round and round the tent. but i had not sat a
moment--scarcely twenty breathing spaces--when a faint, fine scent of
herb-cured wolf-skins came upon the air, and strange shadows began to
stand out clear upon the floor. i saw my weapons shining with a pale
refulgence, and--by all the gods!--the walls of the tent were a-shimmer
with pale luster! with a half-stifled cry i leaped to my feet, and
there--there across the bier--though you tell me i lie a thousand
times--there, calm, refulgent, looking gently in the dead girl's face,
splendid in her ruddy savage beauty, bending over that white marbled
body, so ghostly thin and yet so real, so true in every line and limb,
was blodwen--blodwen, the british chieftainess--my thousand-years-dead
wife.

standing there serene and lovely, with that strange lavender glow about
her, was that wonderful and dreadful shade--holding the dead girl's
hand and looking at her closely with a face that spoke of neither
resentment nor sorrow. i stood and stared at them, every wit within me
numb and cold by the suddenness of it, and then the apparition slowly
lifted her eyes to mine, and i--the wildest sensations of the strong
old love and brand-new fear possessed me. what! do you tell me that
affection dies? why, there in that shadowed tent, so long after, so
untimely, so strange and useless--all the old stream of the love i
had borne for that beautiful slave-girl, though it had been cold and
overlaid by other loves for a thousand years, welled up in my heart
on a sudden. i made half a pace toward her, i stretched a trembling,
entreating hand, yet drew it back, for i was mortal and i feared; and
an ecstasy of pleasure filled my throbbing veins, and my love said:
"on! she was thine once and must be now--down to thy knees and claim
her!--what matters anything, if thou hast a lien upon such splendid
loveliness!" and my coward flesh hung back cold and would not, and now
back and now forward i swayed with these contending feelings, while
that fair shadow eyed me with the most impenetrable calm. at last she
spoke, with never a tone in her voice to show she remembered it was
near three hundred years since she had spoken before.

"my phœnician," she said in soft monotone, looking at the dead isobel
who lay pale in the soft-blue shine about her, "this was a pity. you
are more dull-witted than i thought."

i bent my head but could not speak, and so she asked:

"didst really never guess who it was yonder steel armor hid?"

"not once," i said, "o sweetly dreadful!"

"nor who it was that stirred the white maid to love over there in her
home?"

"what!" i gasped. "was that you?--was that your face, then, in truth i
saw, reflecting in this dead girl's when first i met her?"

"why, yes, good merchant. and how you could not know it passes all
comprehension."

"and then it was you, dear and dreadful, who moved her? jove! 'twas you
who filled her beating pulses there down by the cedars, it was you who
prompted her hot tongue to that passionate wooing? but why--why?"

that shadow looked away for a moment, and then turned upon me one
fierce, fleeting glance of such strange, concentrated, unquenchable,
impatient love that it numbed my tongue and stupefied my senses, and i
staggered back, scarce knowing whether i were answered or were not.

presently she went on. "then, again, you are a little forgetful at
times, my master--so full of your petty loves and wars it vexes me."

"vexes you! that were wonderful indeed; yet, 'tis more wonderful
that you submit. one word to me--to come but one moment and stand
shining there as now you do--and i should be at your feet, strange,
incomparable."

"it might be so, but that were supposing such moments as these were
always possible. dost not notice, phœnician, how seldom i have been
to thee like this, and yet, remembering that i forget thee not,
that mayhap i love thee still, canst thou doubt but that wayward
circumstance fits to my constant wish but seldom?"

"yet you are immortal; time and space seem nothing; barriers and
distance--all those things that shackle men--have no meaning for you.
all thy being formed on the structure of a wish and every earthly law
subservient to your fancy, how is it you can do so much and yet so
little, and be at once so dominant and yet so feeble?"

"i told you, dear friend, before, that with new capacities new laws
arise. i near forget how far i once could see--what was the edge of
that shallow world you live in--where exactly the confines of your
powers and liberty are set. but this i know for certain, that, while
with us the possible widens out into splendid vagueness, the impossible
still exists."

"and do you really mean, then, that fate is still the stronger among
you?--this fair girl, here, sweet shadow! oh! with one of those
terrible and shining arms crossed there on thy bosom, couldst thou
not have guided into happy void that fatal spear that killed? surely,
surely, it were so easy!"

the priestess dropped her fair head, and over her dim-white shoulders,
and her pleasant-scented, hazy wolf-skins, her ruddy hair, all agleam
in that strange refulgence, shone like a cascade of sleeping fire. then
she looked up and replied, in low tones:

"the swimmer swims and the river runs, the wished-for point may be
reached or it may not, the river is the stronger."

somehow, i felt that my shadowy guest was less pleased than before, so
i thought a moment and then said: "where is she now?" and glanced at
isobel.

"the novice," smiled blodwen, "is asleep."

"oh, wake her!" i cried, "for one moment, for half a breath, for one
moiety of a pulse, and i will never ask thee other questions."

"insatiable! incredulous! how far will thy reckless love and wonder go?
must i lay out before thy common eyes all the things of the unknown for
you to sample as you did your bags of fig and olive?"

"i loved her before, and i love her still, even as i loved and still
love thee. does she know this?"

"she knows as much as you know little. look!" and the shadow spread out
one violet hand over that silent face.

i looked, and then leaped back with a cry of fear and surprise. the
dead girl was truly dead, not a muscle or a finger moved, yet, as at
that bidding, i turned my eyes upon her there under the tender glowing
shadow of that wondrous palm, a faint flush of colorless light rose
up within her face, and on it i read, for one fleeting moment, such
inexplicable knowledge, such extraordinary felicity, such impenetrable
contentment, that i stood spellbound, all of a tremble, while that
wondrous radiance died away even quicker than it had risen. gods! 'twas
like the shine of the herald dawn on a summer morning, it was like the
flush on the water of a coming sunrise--i drew my hand across my face
and looked up, expecting the chieftainess would have gone, but she was
still there.

"are you satisfied for the moment, dear trader, or would you catechize
me as you did just now yonder by the fire under the altar in the
circle?"

"just now!" i exclaimed, as her words swept back to me the remembrance
of the stormy night in the old saxon days when, with the fair editha
asleep at my knee, that shade had appeared before--"just now! why,
shadow, that was three hundred years ago!"

"three hundred what?"

"three hundred years--full round circles, three hundred varying
seasons. why, blodwen, forests have been seeded, and grown venerable,
and decayed about those stones since we were there!"

"well, maybe they have. i now remember that interval you call a year,
and what strange store we set by it, and i dimly recollect," said the
dreamy spirit, "what wide-asunder episodes those were between the green
flush of your forests and the yellow. but now--why, the grains of sand
here on thy tent-floor are not set more close together--do not seem
more one simple whole to you, than your trivial seasons do to me. ah!
dear merchant, and as you smile to see the ripples of the sea sparkle a
moment in frolic chase of one another, and then be gone into the void
from whence they came, so do we lie and watch thy petty years shine for
a moment on the smooth bosom of the immense."

deep, strange, and weird seemed her words to me that night, and much
she said more than i have told i could not understand, but sat with
bent head and crossed arms full of strange perplexity of feeling, now
glancing at the dead soldier-maid my body loved, and then looking at
that comely column of blue woman-vapor, that sat so placid on the foot
of the bier and spoke so simply of such wondrous things.

for an hour we talked, and then on a sudden blodwen started to her feet
and stood in listening attitude. "they are coming, phœnician," she
cried, and pointed to the door.

i arose with a strange, uneasy feeling and looked out. the gray dawn
had spread from sky to sky, and an angry flush was over all the air.
the morning wind blew cold and melancholy, and the shrouded mists,
like bands of pale specters, were trooping up the bloody valley
before it, but otherwise not a soul was moving, not a sound broke the
ghostly stillness. i dropped the awning, and shook my head at the fair
priestess, whereon she smiled superior, as one might at a wayward
child, and for a minute or two we spoke again together. then up she
got once more, tall and stately, with dilated nostrils and the old
proud, expectant look i had seen on her sweet red face so often as we
together, hand in hand, and heart to heart, had galloped out to tribal
war. "they come, phœnician, and i must go," she whispered, and again
she pointed to the tent-door, though never a sound or footfall broke
the stillness.

"you shall not, must not go, wife, priestess, queen!" i cried, throwing
myself on my knee at those shadowy feet, and extending my longing
arms. "oh! you that can awake, put me to sleep--you, that can read to
the finish of every half-told tale, relieve me of the long record of
my life! oh, stay and mend my loneliness, or, if you go, let me come
too--i ask not how or whither."

"not yet," she said, "not yet" and then, while more seemed actually
upon her lips, i did hear the sound of footfalls outside, and,
wondering, i sprang to the curtain and lifted it.

there, outside, standing in the first glint of the yellow sunshine,
were some half-dozen of my honest veterans, all with spades and picks
and in their leathern doublets.

"you see, sir," said the spokesman, sorrowfully, the while he scraped
the half-dry clay from off his trenching spade, "we have come round for
our brave young captain--for your good lady, sir--the first. presently
we shall be very busy, and we thought mayhap you would like this over
as soon and quiet as might be."

they had come for isobel! i turned back into the tent, wondering what
they would think of my strange guest, and she was gone! not one ray
of light was left behind--not one thread of her lavender skirt shone
against my black walls--only the cold, pale girl there, stiff and
white, with the shine of the dawn upon her dead face; and all my long
pain and vigils told upon me, and, with a cry of pain and grief i could
not master, i dropped upon a seat and hid my face upon my arm.

i had had enough of france with that night, and three hours afterward
went straight to the king and told him so, begging him to relieve
me from my duty and let me get back to england, there to seek the
dead maid's kindred, and find in some new direction forgetfulness of
everything about the victorious camp. and to this the king replied, by
commending my poor service far too highly, saying some fair kind things
out of his smooth courtier tongue about her that was no more, and in
good part upbraiding me for bringing, as he supposed i had brought,
one so gentle-nurtured so far afield; then he said: "in faith, good
soldier, were to-day but yesterday, and philip's army still before us,
we would not spare you even though our sympathy were yours as fully as
'tis now. but my misguided cousin is away to paris, and his following
are scattered to the four winds--for which god and all the saints be
thanked! there is thus less need for thy strong arm and brave presence
in our camp, and if you really would--why then, go, and may kind time
heal those wounds which, believe me, i do most thoroughly assess."

"but stay a minute!" he cried after me. "how soon could you make a
start?"

"i have no gear," i said, "and all my prisoners have been set free
unransomed. i could start here, even as i stand."

"soldierly answered," exclaimed the king; "a good knight should have
no baggage but his weapons, and no attachments but his duty. now look!
i can both relieve you of irksome charges here and excuse with reason
both ample and honorable your going. come to me as soon as you have put
by your armor. i will have ready for you a scrip sealed and signed--no
messenger has yet gone over to england with the news of our glorious
yesterday, and this charge shall be thine. take the scrip straight to
the queen in england. there, no thanks, away! away! thou wilt be the
most popular man in all my realm before the sun goes down, i fear."

i well knew how honorable was this business that the good king had
planned for me, and made my utmost despatch. i gave my tent to one
esquire and my spare armor to another. i ran and gripped the many
bronzed hands of my tough companions, and told them (alas! unwittingly
what a lie that were!) that i would come again; then i bestowed my
charger (jove! how reluctant was the gift!) upon the next in rank
below me, and mounted isobel's light war-horse, and paid my debts, and
settled all accounts, and was back at our great captain's tent just as
his chaplain was sanding the last lines upon that despatch which was to
startle yonder fair country waiting so expectant across the narrow sea.

they rolled it up in silk and leather and put it in a metal cylinder,
and shut the lid and sealed it with the king's own seal, and then he
gave it to me.

"take this," he said, "straight to the queen, and give it into her
own hands. be close and silent, for you will know it were not meet to
be robbed of thy news upon the road: but i need not tell you of what
becomes a trusty messenger. there! so, strap it in thy girdle, and god
speed thee--surely such big news was never packed so small before."

i left the royal tent and vaulted into the ready saddle without. one
hour, i thought, as the swift steed's head was turned to the westward,
may take me to the shore, and two others may set me on foot in england.
then, if they have relays upon the road, three more will see me
kneeling at the lady's feet, the while her fingers burst these seals.
lord! how they shall shout this afternoon! how the 'prentices shall
toss their caps, and the fat burghers crowd the narrow streets, and
every rustic hamlet green ring to the sky with gratitude! ah! six hours
i thought might do the journey; but read, and you shall see how long it
took.

scouring over the low grassy plains as hard as the good horse could
gallop, with the gray sea broadening out ahead with every mile we went,
full of thoughts of a busy past and uncertain future, i hardly noticed
how the wind was freshening. yet, when we rode down at last by a loose
hill road to the beach, strong gusts were piping amid the treetops, and
the king's galleys were lurching and rolling together at their anchors
by the landing-stage as the short waves came crowding in, one close
upon another, under the first pressure of a coming storm.

but, wind or no wind, i would cross; and i spoke to the captain of
the galleys, showing him my pass with its royal signet, and saying i
must have a ship at once, though all the cave of eblis were let loose
upon us. that worthy, weather-beaten fellow held the mandate most
respectfully in one hand, while he pulled his grizzled beard with the
other and stared out into the north, where, under a black canopy of
lowering sky, the sea was seamed with gray and hurrying squalls, then
turned to the cluster of sailors who were crowded round us--guessing
my imperious errand--to know who would start upon it. and those rough
salts swore no man of sanity would venture out--not even for a king's
generous bounty--not even to please victorious edward would they
go--no, nor to ease the expectant hearts of twenty thousand wives, or
glad the proud eyes of ten score hundred mothers. it was impossible,
they said--see how the frothy spray was flying already over the harbor
bar, and how shrill the frightened sea-mews were rising high above the
land!--no ship would hold together in such a wind as that brewing out
over there, no man this side of hell could face it--and yet, and yet,
"why!" laughed a leathery fellow, slapping his mighty fist into his
other palm, "as i was born by sareham, and knew the taste of salt spray
nearly as early as i knew my mother's milk, it shall never be said i
was frightened by a hollow sky and a frenchman's wind. i'll be your
pilot, sir."

"and i will go wherever old harry dares," put in a stout young fellow.
"and i," "and i," "and i," was chorused on every side, as the brave
english seamen caught the bold infection, and in a brief space there,
under the lee of the gray harbor jetty, before a motley cheering crowd,
all in the blustering wind and rain, i rode my palfrey up the sloping
way, and on to the impatient tossing little bark that was to bear the
great news to england.

we stabled the good steed safe under the half-deck forward, set the
mizzen and cast off the hawser, and soon the little vessel's prow was
bursting through the crisp waves at the harbor mouth, her head for
home, and behind, dim through the rainy gusts, the white house-fronts
of the beach village, and far away the uplands where the english army
lay. we reefed and set the sails as we drew from the land, but truly
those fellows were right when they hung back from sharing the peril and
the glory with me! the strong blue waters of the midland sea whereon
i first sailed my merchant bark were like the ripples of a sheltered
pond to the roaring trench and furrows of this narrow northern strait.
all day long we fought to westward, and every hour we spent the wind
came stronger and more keenly out of the black funnel of the north,
and the waves swelled broader and more monstrous. by noon we saw the
english shore gleam ghostly white through the flying reek in front; but
by then, so fierce was the northeaster howling, that, though we went to
windward and off again, doing all that good seamen could, now stealing
a spell ahead, and anon losing it amid a blinding squall, we could not
near the english port for which we aimed, there, in the cleft of the
dim white cliffs.

after a long time of this, our captain came to me where i leaned,
watchful, against the mast, and said:

"the king has made an order, as you will know, all vessels from france
are to sail for his town of dover there, and nowhere else, on a pain of
a fine that would go near to swamp such as we."

"good skipper," i answered, "i know the law, but there are exceptions
to every rule, which, well taken, only cast the more honor on general
stringency. king edward would have you make that port at all reasonable
times; but if you cannot reach it, as you surely cannot now, you are
not bound to sail me, his messenger, to paradise in lieu thereof. i
pray you, put down your helm and run, and take the nearest harbor
the wind will let us." at this the captain turned upon his heel well
pleased, and our ship came round, and now, before the gale, sailed
perhaps a little easier.

but it scarcely bettered our fortune. a short time before dusk, while
we wallowed heavily in the long furrows, my poor palfrey was thrown and
broke her fore legs over her trestle bar, and between fear and pain
screamed so loud and shrill, it chilled even my stalwart sailors. then,
later on, as we rode the frothy summit of a giant wave, our topmast
snapped, and fell among us and the wild, loose ropes writhed and lashed
about worse than a hundred biting serpents, and the bellowing sail,
like a great bull, jerked and strained for a moment so that i thought
that it would unstep the mast itself, and then went all to tatters with
a hollow boom, while we, knee-deep in the swirling sea that filled our
hollow, deckless ship, gentle and simple, 'prentice and knight, whipped
out our knives and gave over to the hungry ocean all that riven tackle.

it was enough to make the stoutest heart beat low to ride in such
a creaking, retching cockle-shell over the hill and dale of that
stupendous water. now, out of the tumble and hiss, down we would go,
careering down the glassy side of a mighty green slope, the creamy
white water boiling under our low-sunk bows, and there, in mid-hollow,
with the tempest howling overhead, we would have for a breathing space
a blessed spell of seeming calm. and then, ere we could taste that
scant felicity, the reeling floor would swell beneath us, and out of
the watery glen, hurtled by some unseen power, we rose again up, up
to the spume and spray, to the wild shouting wind that thrilled our
humming cordage and lay heavy upon us, while the gleaming turmoil
through which we staggered and rushed leaped at our fleeting sides like
packs of white sea-wolves, and all the heaving leaden distance of the
storm lay spread in turn before us--then down again.

hour after hour we reeled down the english coast with the wild
mid-channel in fury on our left and the dim-seen ramparts of breakers
at the cliff feet on our right. then, as we went, the light began to
fail us. our weather-beaten steersman's face, which had looked from his
place by the tiller so calm and steadfast over the war of wind and sea,
became troubled, and long and anxiously he scanned the endless line
of surf that shut us from the many little villages and creeks we were
passing.

"you see, sir knight," shouted the captain to me, as, wet through, we
held fast to the same rope--"'tis a question with us whether we find a
shelter before the light goes down, or whether we spend a night like
this out on the big waters yonder."

"and does he," i asked, "who pilots us know of a near harbor?"

"ah! there is one somewhere hereabout, but with a perilous bar across
the mouth, and the tide serves but poorly for getting over. if we can
cross it there is a dry jacket and supper for all this evening, and if
we do not, may the saints in paradise have mercy on us!"

"try, good fellow, try!" i shouted; "many a dangerous thing comes
easier by the venturing, and i am already a laggard post!" so the word
was passed for each man to stand by his place, and through the gloom
and storm, the beating spray and the wild pelting rain, just as the wet
evening fell, we neared the land.

we swept in from the storm, and soon there was the bar plain enough--a
shining, thunderous crescent--glimmering pallid under the shadow of
the land, a frantic hell of foam and breakers that heaved and broke
and surged with an infernal storm-deriding tumult, and tossed the
fierce white fountains of its rage mast-high into the air, and swirled
and shone and crashed in the gloom, sending the white litter of its
turmoil in broad ghostly sheets far into that black still water we
could make out beyond under the veil of spume and foam hanging above
that boiling caldron. straight to it we went through the cold, fierce
wind, with the howl of the black night behind us, and the thunder of
that shine before. we came to the bar, and i saw the white light on
the strained brave faces of my silent friends. i looked aft, and there
was the helmsman calm and strong, unflinchingly eyeing the infernal
belt before us. i saw all this in a scanty second, and then the white
hell was under our bows and towering high above our stern a mighty
crested, foam-seamed breaker. with the speed of a javelin thrown by a
strong hand, we rushed into the wrack; one blinding moment of fury and
turmoil, and then i felt the vessel stagger as she touched the sand;
the next instant her sides went all to splinters under my very feet,
and the great wave burst over us and rushed thundering on in conscious
strength, and not two planks of that ill-fated ship, it seemed, were
still together.

over and over through the swirl and hum i was swept, the dying cries
of my ship-fares sounding in my ears like the wail of disembodied
spirits--now, for a moment, i was high in the spume and ruck, gasping
and striking out as even he who likes his life the least will gasp in
like case, and then, with thunderous power, the big wave hurled me down
into the depth, down, down, into the inky darkness with all the noises
of inferno in my ears, and the great churning waters pressing on me
till the honest air seemed leagues above, and my strained, bursting
chest was dying for a gasp. then again, the hideous, playful waters
would tear asunder and toss me high into the keen, strong air, with the
yellow stars dancing above, and the long line of the black coast before
my salt tear-filled eyes, and propped me up just so long as i might get
half a gasping sigh, and hear the storm beating wildly on the farther
side of the bar; then the mocking sea would laugh in savage frolic, and
down again. gods! right into the abyss of the nether turmoil, fathoms
deep, like a strand of worthless sea-wrack, scouring over the yellow
sand-beds where never living man went before, all in the cruel fingers
of the icy midnight sea, was i tossed here and there.

and when i did not die, when the savage sea, like a great beast of
prey, let me live by gasps to spread its enjoyment the more, and
tossed and teased me, and shouted so hideous in my ears and weighed
me down--why, the last spark of spirit in me burnt up on a sudden,
fierce and angry. i set my teeth and struck out hard and strong. ah!
and the sea grew somewhat sleek when i grew resolute, and, after some
minutes of this new struggle, rolled more gently and buried me less
deep each time in its black foam-ribbed vortex, and, presently, in half
an hour perhaps, the thunder of the bar was all behind me instead of
round about, the stars were steadier in their places, the dim barrier
of the land frowned through the rain direct above, and a few minutes
more, wondrous spent and weary, the black water flowing in at my low
and swollen lips with every stroke, yet strong in heart and hopeful, i
found myself floating up a narrow estuary on a dim, foam-flecked but
peaceful tide.

the strong but gentle current swept in with the flowing water under the
dark shadows of the land, past what seemed, in the wet night-gloom,
like rugged banks of tree and forest, and finally floated me to where,
among loose boulders and sand, the tamed water was lapping on a smooth
and level beach. i staggered ashore, and sat down as wet and sorry as
well could be. life ran so cold and numb within, it seemed scarce worth
the cost spent in keeping. my scrip was still at my side, but my sword
was gone, my clothing torn to ribbons, and a more buffeted messenger
never eyed askance the scroll that led him into such a plight. where
was i? the great gods who live forever alone could tell, yet surely
scores of miles from where i should be! i got to my feet, reeking with
wet and spray, the gusty wind tossing back the black phrygian locks
from off my forehead, and glared around. sigh, sigh, sigh went the
gale in the pines above, while mournful pipings came about the shore
like wandering voices, and the sea boomed sullenly out yonder in the
darkness! i stared and stared, and then started back a pace and stared
again. i turned round on my heel and glowered up the narrow inlet and
out to sea; then at the beetling crags above and the dim-seen mounds
inland; then all on a sudden burst into a scornful laugh--a wild, angry
laugh that the rocks bandied about on the wet night-air and sent back
to me blended with all the fitful sobs and moaning of the wind.

the lonely harbor, that of a thousand harbors i had come to, was the
old british beach. it was my druid priestess's village place that i was
standing on!

i laughed long and loud as i, the old trader in wine and olives--i,
the felucca captain, with cloth and wine below and a comely red-haired
slave on deck--i, again, in other guise, royal edward's chosen
messenger--as good a knight as ever jerked a victorious brand home
into its scabbard--stood there with chattering teeth and shaking knee,
mocking fate and strange chance in reckless spirit. i laughed until
my mood changed on a sudden, and then, swearing by twenty forgotten
hierarchies i would not stand shivering in the rain for any wild pranks
that fate might play me, i staggered off on to the hard ground.

every trace of my old village had long since gone; yet though it were a
thousand years ago i knew my way about with a strange certainty. i left
the shore, and pushed into the overhanging woods, dark and damp and
somber, and presently i even found a well-known track (for these things
never change); and, half glad and half afraid--a strange, tattered,
dismal prodigal come strangely home--i pushed by dripping branch and
shadowy coverts, out into the open grass hills beyond.

here, on some ghostly tumuli near about, the gray shine of the night
showed scattered piles of mighty stones and broken circles that once
had been our temples and the burial places for great captains. i turned
my steps to one of these on the elbow of a little ridge overlooking
the harbor, and, perhaps, two hundred paces inland from it, and found
a vast lichened slab of stupendous bulk undermined by weather, and all
on a slope with a single entrance underneath one end. did ever man
ask lodgment in like circumstances? it was the burial mound of an old
druid headman, and i laughed a little again to think how well i had
known him--grim old ufner of the reeking altars. hoth! what a cruel,
bloody old priest he was!--never did a man before, i chuckled, combine
such piety and savagery together. how that old fellow's cruel small
eyes did sparkle with native pleasure as the thick, pungent smoke of
the sacrificial fire went roaring up, and the hiss and splutter half
drowned the screaming of men and women pent in their wicker cages amid
that blaze! oh! old ufner liked the smell of hot new blood, and there
was no music to his british ear like the wail of a captive's anguish.
and then for me to be pattering round his cell like this in the gusty
dark midnight, shivering and alone, patting and feeling the mighty lid
of that great crypt, and begging a friendly shelter in my stress and
weariness of that ghostly hostelry--it was surely strange indeed.

twice or thrice i walked round the great coffer--it was near as big
as a herdsman's cottage--and then, finding no other crack or cranny,
stopped and stooped before the tiny portal at the lower end. i saw as
i knelt that that tremendous slab was resting wondrous lightly on a
single point of upright stone set just like the trigger of an urchin's
mouse-trap, but, nothing daunted, pushing and squeezing, in i crept,
and felt with my hands all that i could not see.

the foxes and the weather had long since sent all there was of ufner
to dust. all was bare and smooth, while round the sides were solid,
deep earth-planted slabs of rock--no one knew better than i how thick
they were and heavy!--and on the floor a soft couch of withered leaves
and grasses.

now one more sentence, and the chapter is ended. i had not coiled
myself down on those leaves a minute, my weary head had nodded but
once upon my arm, my eyelids drooped but twice, when, with a soundless
start, undermined by the fierce storm, and moved a fatal hair's-breadth
by my passage, the propping key-stone fell in, and all at once my giant
roof began to slide. that vast and ponderous stone, that had taken two
tribes to move, was slipping slowly down, and as it went, all along
where it ground, a line of glowing lambent fire, a smoking hissing
band of dust marked its silent, irresistible progress--a hissing belt
of dust, and glow that shone for a half-moment round the fringe of
that stupendous portal--and then, too late as i tottered to my weary
knees, and extended a feeble hand toward the entrance, that mighty door
came to a rest, that ponderous slab, that scarce a thousand men could
move, fell with a hollow click three inches into the mortises of the
earth-bound walls, and there in that mighty coffer i was locked--fast,
deep, and safe!

i listened. not a sound, not a breath of the storm without moved in
that strange chamber. i stared about, and not one cranny of light
broke the smooth velvet darkness. what mattered it? i was weary and
tired--to-morrow i would shout and some one might hear, to-night i
would rest; and, jove! how deep and warm and pleasant was that leafy
bed that chance had spread there on the floor for me!

chapter xvii

i cannot say, distinctly, what roused me next morning. my faculties
were all in a maze, my body cramped and stiff as old leather--no doubt
due to the wetting of the previous evening, or my hard couch--while
the darkness bewildered and numbed my mind. yet, indeed, i awoke, and,
after all, that was the great thing. i awoke and yawned, and feebly
stretched my dry and aching arms--good heavens! how the pain did fly
and shoot about them!--and rolled my stiff and rusty eyeballs, and
twisted that pulsing neck that seemed in that first moment of returning
life like a burning column of metal through which the hot river of my
starting blood was surging in a hissing, molten stream. i stretched,
and looked and listened as though my faculties were helpless prisoners
behind my numb, useless senses; but, peer and crane forward as i would,
nothing stirred the black stillness of my strange bed-chamber.

nothing, did i say? truly it was nothing for a time, and then i could
have sworn, by all the rich repository of gods and saints that the
wreck of twenty hierarchies had stranded in my mind, that i heard a
real material sound, a click and rattle, like metal striking stone,
this being followed immediately by a star of light somewhere in the mid
black void in front. fie! 'twas but a freak of fancy, the stretching of
my cramped and aching sinews, but a nucleus of those swimming lights
that mocked my still sleepy eyes! i covered them with my hands and
groaned to be awake; i strove to make point or sense out of the wild
flood of remembrance that ebbed and flooded in thunderous sequence
through my head; and then again, obtrusive and clear, came the click!
click! of the unseen metal, and the shine of the great white planet
that burned in the black firmament of my prison behind it.

i staggered to my feet, stretching out eager hands in the void space to
touch the walls, and tried to move; and, as i did so, my knees gave way
beneath me; i made a wild grasp in the darkness, and fell in a loose
heap upon the littered, dusty floor. lord! how my joints did ache! how
the hot, swift throes that monopolized my being shot here and there
about my cramped and twitching limbs! i rolled upon the dust-dry earth
of that gloomy chamber and cursed my last night's wetting; cursed the
salt-sea spray that could breed such fiery torments; and even sent to
hades my errand and my scrip of victory, the which, however, i was
cheered to note, in its bronze case now and then, with a movement or
a spasm of pain, knocked against my bare ribs as though to upbraid me
as a laggard embassy for lying sleeping here while all men waked to
know my tidings. i rose again, with rare difficulty but successfully
this time, and peered and listened till the dancing colors in my eyes
filled the empty air with giddy spinning suns and constellations, and
the making tide of wakefulness, flooding the channels of my veins,
cheated my ears to fancy some hideous storm was raging up above, and
thunderbolts were tearing shrieking furrows down the trembling sides
of mountains, and all the rivers of the world (so hideous was that
shocking sound) were tumbling headlong in wild confusion into the void
middle of the world.

i stuffed my ears and shut my eyes, and turned sick and faint at that
infernal tumult. my head spun and throbbed, and my light feet felt the
world give under them. i had nearly fallen, when once again, just as
my spinning brain was growing numb, and the close, thin air of that
place failed to answer to the needs of my new vitality, there came
that click! click! again, and the blessed white star that followed
it. this time that gleam of hope was broad and strong. on either side
as it shone, white zigzag rays flew out and stood so written upon
the black tablet of my prison. ah! and a draught of nectar, of real,
divine nectar, of sweet white country air, came in from that celestial
puncture!

i leaped to it and knelt, and put my thirsty lips to that refulgence
and drank the simple ambient air that came through, as though i were
some thirsty pilgrim at a gushing stream. and it revived me, cooling
the rising fever of my blood, and numbing, like the sweet sedative
it was, the pains, that soon ran less keen and throbbed less strong,
and, in a few more minutes, went gently away into the distance under
its beneficent touch. mayhap i fainted or slept for some little time,
overwhelmed by the stress of those few waking moments. when i looked up
again all was changed. i myself was new and fresh, and felt with every
pulse the strong life beating firm and gentle within me; and my prison
cell--it was no more a prison!

there was a gap bigger than my fist where the star had been, with great
fissures marking the outline of one of the stones that had supported
the topmost slab, and through the gap a peep of countryside, of yellow
grass, and sapphire sea, of pearly waves lisping in summer playfulness
around a golden shore, and overhead a sky of delightful blue.

i was grateful, and understood it all. the storm had gone down during
the night and the sun had risen; these were good folk outside, who, by
some chance, knew of my sheltering-place and had come early to release
me--a happy chance indeed! and it was their strong blows and crowbars
working on my massive walls that let in the light, and--none too
soon--refreshed me with a draught of outer air. fool that i was to let
an uneasy night and a salt-sea soaking cloud my wit!

i was so pleased at the prospect of speedy release that i was on the
point of calling out to cheer my lusty friends at their work and show
the prisoner lived. but had i done so this book had never been written!
that shout was all but uttered--my mouth was close to the orifice
through which came the pleasant gleam of daylight, when voices of men
outside speaking one to another fell upon my ear.

"by st. george," i heard one fellow say, "and every fiend in hell! they
who built this place surely meant it to last to judgment! here we have
been heaving at it since near daylight and not moved a stone."

"ah! and if you stand gaping there," chimed in another, "we'll not
have moved one by tuesday week. on, you log! let's see something of
that strength you brag of--why, even now i saw a shine and twinkle in
the opening there. this crib may prove the cradle of our fortunes, may
make us richer men than any strutting sheriffs, and recompense us for
a dozen disappointments! to it again; and you, harry, stand ready with
the wedges to put them in when we do lift."

i pricked my ears at this, as you will guess, for there was no mention
of me expectant, and only talk of wealth and recompense. i listened,
and heard the sulky workman take again his crowbar. i heard him call
for a drink, and the splash of the liquid into the leathern cup sounded
wonderfully clear in my silent chamber; then, as though in no hurry to
fall on, he asked, "what of the spoil we have already, mates? a sight
of those baubles would greatly lighten our labor, i think."

"now, as i had a man for my father," burst out the first speaker,
"never did i see so small a heart in so big a body! show him the swag,
harry! rattle it under his greedy nose! and when he has done gloating
on it perhaps he'll turn to and do something for a breakfast!"

at this there was a pause and a moving of feet, as though men were
collecting round some common object. then came the tinkle of metals,
and, by jove! i had not yet forgotten so much of merchant cunning in
my soldiering but that i recognized the music of gold and silver over
the base clink of lesser stuff. they tried, and sampled, and rung those
wares over my head; and presently he who was best among them said:

"a very pretty haul, mates, and, wisely disposed of, enough to furnish
us well, both inside and out, for a long time. these circlets here are
silver, i take it, and will run into a sweet ingot in the smelting-pot.
yon boss is a brooch, by the pin, and of gold; though surely such a
vile fashion was never forged since shem's hammer last went silent."

"what, gold, sir!"

"ah! what else, old bullet-costard? dost thou think i come round and
prize cursed devil-haunted mounds for lumps of clay? the brooch is
gold, i say; and the least of these trinkets" (whereon there came a
sound like one playing with bracelet and bangle)--"the worst of them
white silver. to it, then, good fellows, again! burst me this stony
crypt, and, if it prove such a coffer as i have right to hope, before
the day is an hour older, you shall down to yonder town and there get
drunk past expectation and your happiest imaginings."

so, my friends, i mused, 'tis not pure neighborliness that brings you
thus early to my rescue! never mind; many a good deed has been done
in search of a sordid object, and whether you come for me or gold, it
shall vantage me alike. i will lend a hand on my side, since it were a
pity to keep this big fellow from his breakfast longer than need be.

while they plied spade and lever outside, i scraped below, and put
in, as well as i was able, a stone wedge now and then, whenever their
exertions canted the great stone a little to one side or the other.
the interest of all this, and because i was never apt in deceit, made
me somewhat reckless about showing too soon at the narrow opening, and
presently there came a guttural cry above, and a sound as though some
one had dropped a tool and sprung back.

"hullo! stoutheart," called the captain's voice, "what now? is it
another swig of the flask you want to swell your shallow courage, or
has thy puissant crowbar pierced through to hell?"

"hell or not," whined the fellow, "i do think the fiend himself is in
there. i did but stoop on a sudden to peer within, and may i never
empty a flagon again but there was something hideous moving in the
crypt! something round and shaggy, that toiled as we toiled, and pushed
and growled, and had two flaming yellow eyes"

"beast! coward! oh, that i had brought a man instead of thee! 'twas
gold you saw--bright, shining metal--think, thou swine, of all it will
buy, and how thou may'st hereafter wallow in thy foul delights! and
wilt thou forego the stuff so near? gods! i would have a wrestle for it
though it were with the devil himself! give me the crowbar."

apparently the captain's avarice was of stouter kind than the yeoman's,
for soon after this the stone upright began to give, and i saw the
moment of my deliverance was near. now, i argued to myself, these
gentlemen outside are obvious rogues, and will much rather crack me on
the head than share their booty with such a strange-found claimant,
hence i must be watchful. of the two under-rogues i had small fear,
but the captain seemed of bolder mold, and, unless his tongue lied, had
some sort of heart within him. so i waited watchful, and before long
a more than usually stalwart blow set the stone off its balance. it
slipped and leaned, then fell headlong outward with a heavy thud, and,
turning over on its side, rolled to the edge of the slope, and there,
revolving quicker and more quickly, went rumbling and crashing down
through the brambles into the valley a quarter of a mile below. as it
fell outward, a blaze of daylight burst upon my prison, and, with a
shout of joy, the foremost of the rogues dashed into my cell. at the
same moment, with such an old british battle yell as those monoliths
had not heard for a thousand years, but sorely dazed, i sprang forward.
we met in mid career, and the big thief went floundering down. he was
up again in a moment, and, yelling in his fear that the devil was
certainly there, rushed forth--i close behind him--and infected his
timorous comrade, and away they both went toward the woods, racing in
step and screaming in tune, as though they had practised it together
for half a lifetime. the fellows fled, but their leader stood, white
and irresolute, as he well might be, yet made bold by greed; and for a
moment we faced each other--he in his greasy townsman finery, a strong,
sullen thief from bonnet to shoe, and i, grim, gaunt, and ragged,
haggard, wild, unshorn, standing there for a moment against the black
porch of the old druid grave-place--and then, wiping the sunshine from
my dazzled eyes and stooping low, i ran at him! many were the ribbons
and trinkets i had taken long ago at that game. i ran at him, and threw
my arms round his leather-belted middle, and, with a good saxon twist,
tossed his heels fairly into the air and threw him full length over my
shoulder. he fell behind me like a tree on the greensward, while his
head striking the buttress of a stone stunned him, and he lay there
bleeding and insensible.

"hoth! good fellow," i laughed, bending over him, "i am sorry for that
headache you will have to-morrow, but before you challenge so freely to
the wrestle you should know somewhat more of a foeman's prowess!"

when i turned to the little heap of spoil the ravishers of the dead
had gathered and laid out on a cloth upon the stones, at once my mood
softened. there in that curious pile of trinkets were things so ancient
and yet so fresh that i heaved a sigh as i bent over them, and a whiff
of the old time came back--the jolly wild days when the world was young
rose before me as i turned them tenderly one by one. there lay the
bronze nobs from a british shield, and there, corroded and thin, the
long, flat blade that my rugged comrades once could use so well. there
was the broken haft of a wheel-scythe from a chief's battle-car, and,
near by, the green and dinted harness of a war-horse. hoth! how it took
me back! how it made me hear again in the lap of the soft plantagenet
sea and all the insipid sounds of this degenerate countryside the
rattle and hum of the chariots as we raced to war, the sparkle and
clatter of the captains galloping through the leafy british woods, and
then the shout and tumult as we wheeled into line in the open, and,
our loose reins on the stallions' necks and our trembling javelins
quivering in our ready hands, swept down upon the ranks of the reeling
foeman!

there again, in more peaceful wise, was a shoulder-brooch some british
maid had worn, and the wristlet and rings of some red-haired helen
of an unfamous troy. there lay a few links of the neck-chains of a
dust-dead warrior, and there, again, the head of his boar-spear. here
was the thin gold circlet he had on his finger, the rude pin of brass
that fastened his colored cloak and the buckle of his sandal. jove! i
could nearly tell the names of the vanished wearers, i knew all these
things so well!

but it was no use hanging over the pile like this. the ruffian i had
felled was beginning to move, and it served no purpose to remain:
therefore--and muttering to myself that i was a nearer heir to the
treasure than any among those thieves--i selected some dozen of the
fairest, most valuable trinkets, and put them in my wallet. then,
feeling cold--for the fresh morning air was thin and cool here, above
the sea--the best coat from the ragged pile the rogues had thrown
aside, to be the lighter at their work, was chosen, and, with this on
my back, and a stout stave in my hand, i turned to go. but ere i went i
took a last look round--as was only natural--at a place that had given
me such timely shelter overnight. it was strange, very strange; but my
surroundings, as i saw them in the white daylight, matched wondrous
poorly with my remembrance of the evening before! the sea, to begin
with, seemed much farther off than it had done in the darkness. i have
said that when i swam ashore my well-remembered british harbor had,
to my eyes, silted up wofully, so that the knoll on which blodwen's
stockades once stood was some way up the valley. but small as the
estuary had shrunk last night, i had, it seemed, but poorly estimated
its shrinkage. 'twas lesser than ever this morning, and some kine were
grazing among the yellow kingcups on the marshy flats at that very
place where i could have sworn i came ashore on the top of a sturdy
breaker! the greedy green and golden land was cozening the blue channel
sea out of beach and foreshore under my very eyes; the meadow-larks
were playing where the white surf should have been, and tall fern and
mallow flaunted victorious in the breeze where ancient british keels
had never even grated on a sandy bottom. i could not make it out,
and turned to look at the tomb from which i had crept. here, too, the
turmoil of yestere'en and my sick and weary head had cheated me. in the
gloom the pile had appeared a bare and lichened heap washed out from
its old mound by rains: but, jove! it seemed it was not so. i rubbed
my eyes and pulled my peaked beard and stared about me, for the crypt
was a grassy mound again, with one black gap framed by a few rugged
stones jutting from the green, as though the slope above it had slipped
down at that leveler nature's prompting, and piled up earth and rubbish
against the rocks, had escaladed them and marched triumphant up the
green glacis, planting her conquering pennons of bracken and bramble,
mild daisy and nodding foxglove, on that very arch where, by all the
gods! i thought last night the withering lightning would have glanced
harmless from a smooth and lichened surface. well, it only showed how
weary i had been; so, shouldering my cudgel, and with a last sigh cast
back to that pregnant heap of rusty metal, i turned, and with fair
heart, but somewhat shaky limbs, marched off inland to give my wondrous
news.

how pleasant and fair the country was, and after those hot scenes of
battle, the noise and sheen of which still floated confusedly in my
head, how sweetly peaceful! i trod the green, secluded country lanes
with wondrous pleasure, remembering the bare french campagnas, and
stood stock-still at every gap in the blooming hedges to drink the
sweet breath of morning, coming, golden-laden with sunshine and the
breath of flowers, over the rippling meadow-grass! in truth, i was more
english than i had thought, my step was more elastic to tread these
dear domestic leas, and my spirits rose with every mile simply to know
i was in england! and i--a tough, stern soldier, with arms still red
to the elbow in the horrid dye of war, and on a hasty errand, pulled
me a flowering spray from the coppices, and smiled and sang as i went
along, now stopping in delighted trance to hear out the nightingale
that, from a bramble athwart the thicket path, sang most enrapturedly,
and then, forgetful of my haste, standing amazed under the flushed
satin of the blooming apples. "jove!" i laughed, "here is a sweeter
pavilion than any victor prince doth sleep in! fie! to fight and bleed
as we do yonder, while the sweetness of such a tent as this goes all to
waste upon the wind!" and i sat and stared and laughed until the prick
of conscience stirred me and, reluctant, i passed on again. then over
a flowery mead or two, where the banded bees swung in busy fashion at
the lilac cuckoo-flowers, and the shining dewdrops were charged with
a hundred hues, down to a sunny, babbling brook that sparkled by a
yellow ford. there i would stand and watch the silver fingers of the
stream toy and tug the great heads of nodding kingcup, watch the flash
of the new-come swallow's wing, as he shot through the byways between
the mallows, and be so still that e'en the timid water-hen led out
her brood across the freckled play of sunshine on the water, and the
mute kingfisher came to the broken rail and did not fear me. "surely a
happy stream," i thought, "not to divide two princely neighbors! what
a blessed current that can keep its native color and chatter thus of
flowers and sunshine, while yon other torrent runs incarnadine to the
sea--a corpse-choked sewer of red ambition!"

then it was a homestead that, all unseen, i paused by, watching the
great sleek kine knee-deep in the scented yellow straw, the spangled
cock defiant on the wall, the tender doves a-wooing on the roof-ridge,
and presently the swart herdsman, with flail and goad, come out from
beneath his roses and stoop and kiss the pouting cherry lips of the
sweet babe his comely mate held up to him. "jove!" i meditated, "and
here's a goodly kingdom. oh that i had a realm with no politics in it
but such as he has!" and so musing i went along from path to path and
hill to hill.

at one time my feet were turned to a way-side rest-house, where a jug
of wine was asked for and a loaf of bread, for you will remember that
saving a handful of dry biscuit, which i broke in my gauntlet palm and
ate between two charges, i had not broken fast since the morning before
crecy. the master of the tavern took up the coin i tendered and eyed
it critically. he held it in the sun, and rung it on a stone and spat
upon it, then, taking a little dust from the road, rubbed diligently
until he came down through the green sea-slime to the metal below. it
was true-coined, plump, and full, though certainly a trifle rusty; and
this and my grim, commanding figure in his doorway carried the day. he
brought me wine and cheese and bread, whereon i sat on a corner of the
trestle table munching them outside in the sun under shadow of my broad
felt yokel hat, with the quaint inn sign gently creaking overhead, and
my moldy, sea-stained legs dangling under me.

i was in a good mood, yet thoughtful somehow, for had not the king
especially warned me not to part lightly with the precious news
wherewith i was freighted? and if so be that i must be reticent in this
particular, yet again my heart was surely too full of my victorious
errand to let me gossip lightly on trivial matters; thus my bread was
broken in abstracted silence, and, when my beaker went now and again
into the shade of my hat-brim, i drank mutely and proffered no sign
of friendship to those other country wayfarers who stood about the
honeysuckled doorway eyeing me askance after the manner i was so used
to, and whispering now and then to one another.

i sat and thought how my errand was to be most speedily carried out,
for you see i might trudge days and days afoot like this before good
luck or my own limbs brought me to the footstool of edward's royal
wife, and gave me leave to burst that green and rusty case that, with
its precious scroll, still dangled at my side. i had no money to buy a
horse--the bangles taken from the crypt-thieves would not stand against
the value of the boniest palfrey that ever ambled between a tinker's
legs--and last night's infernal wetting had made me into the sorriest,
most moldy-looking herald that ever did a kingly bidding. surely, i
thought, as i glanced at my borrowed clay-stained rustic cloak, my
cracked and rotten leather doublet, my tarnished hose all frayed and
colorless, my shoon, that only held together, methought, by their
patching of gray sea-slime and mud, surely no one will lend or loan me
anything like this; they will laugh at my knightly gage of honorable
return, and scout the faintest whisper of my errand!

thus ruefully reflecting, i had finished my frugal luncheon, yet still
scarce knew what to do, and maybe i had sat dubious like that on the
trestle edge for near an hour, when, looking up on a sudden, there was
a blooming little maid of some three tender years standing in the sun
staring hard upon me, her fair blue eyes ashine with wonder, and the
strands of her golden hair lifting on the breeze like gossamers in
june. she had in one rosebud hand a flower of yellow daffodil, and in
fault of better introduction proffered it to me. my stern soldier heart
was melted by that maid. i took her flower and put it in my belt, and
lifted the little one on my knee, then asked her why she had looked so
hard at the stranger.

"oh!" she said, pointing to where some older children were watching all
this from a safe distance, "johnnie and andrew, my brothers, said you
were surely the devil, and, as they feared, i came myself to see if it
were true."

"and am i? is it true?"

"i do not know," said the little damsel, fixing her clear blue eyes
upon mine--"i do not know for certain, but i like you! i am sorry
for you, because you are so dirty. if you were cleaner i could love
you"--and very cautiously, watching my eyes the while, the pretty babe
put out a petal-soft hand and stroked my grim and weathered face.

i could not withstand such gentle blandishment, and forgot all my
musings and my haste, and kissed those pink fingers under the shadow
of my hat, and laid myself out to win that soft little heart, and won
it, so that, when presently the wondering mother came to claim her own,
the little maiden burst into such a headlong shower of silver april
tears that i had to perjure myself with false promises to come again,
and even the gift of my last coin and another kiss or two scarce set me
free from the sweet investigator.

but now i was aroused, and stalked down the green country road full of
speed and good intention. i would walk to the royal city, since there
were no other way, and these fair shires must have grown expansive
since the olden days if i could not see a march or two while the sun
was up. eastward and north i knew the court should lie, so bent my
steps through glades and commons with the midday sun behind my better
shoulder. but the journey was to be shorter than seemed likely at the
outset. after asking, to no purpose, my road of several rustics, a
venerable wayfarer was chanced upon, ambling down a shady gully.

this quaint old fellow sat a rough little steed, one, indeed, of the
poorest-looking, most knock-kneed beasts i had ever seen a gentleman
of gentle quality astride of. and, in truth, the rider was not better
kept. he wore a great widespreading cloak of threadbare stuff, falling
from his shoulders to his knees in such ample folds that it half hid
the neck and quarters of his steed. below this mantle, splashed with
twenty shades of mud and most quaintly patched, you saw the pricks of
rusty iron spurs on old and shabby leather boots, and just the point
of a frayed black leather scabbard peeping under his stirrup-straps.
the hat he wore was broad-brimmed and peaked, and looked near as old
as did its wearer. under that shapeless cover was a most strange face.
i do not think i ever saw so much and various writ upon so little
parchment as shone upon the dry and wrinkled surface of that rider's
features. there were cunning and closeness on it, and yet they did
not altogether hide the openness of gentle birth and liberal thought.
now you would think to watch those shrewd, keen eyes a-glitter there
under the penthouse of his shaggy eyebrows, he was some paltry trader
with a vision bounded by his weekly till and the infruct of his lying
measures, and then anon, at some word or passing fancy, as you came
to know him better, 'twas strange to see how eagle-like those optics
shone, and with what a clear, bright, prophetic gaze the old fellow
would stare, like a steersman through the dim-lit gloom of a starry
night, over the wide horizon of the visionary and uncertain! he
could look as small and mean about the mouth as a usurer on settling
day; and then, when his mood changed, and he fell thoughtful, the
gentle melancholy of his face--the goodly soul that spoke behind that
changeful mask, the strange dissatisfaction, the incompleteness, the
unhappy longing for something unattainable there reflected, made you
sad to look upon it!

i overtook this quaint rider as he rode alone, my active feet being
more than a match for the shaky limbs of that mean beast he sat upon,
and, coming alongside, observed him unnoticed for a minute. truly as
quaint a fellow-traveler as you could meet! his head was sunk, and his
grizzled white beard fell over his chest: his eyes were fixed in vacant
stare on some vision of the future; and his lips moved tremulously now
and again as the thoughts of his mind escaped unheeded from between
them. was he poet? was he seer? was it a black past or a red, rosy
future the old fellow babbled of? jove! i was not in very good kind
myself, and i fancy i had read now and again, in the wonder of those
who saw me, that my face had a tale to tell. but, by the great gods! i
was neat and pretty-pied beside this most rusty gentleman; my face was
as void as a curd-fed bumpkin's, compared to those eloquently absent
eyes, that fine, mean profile, there, in the slouch of the big hat, and
those busy lips!

"good-morning, sir!" i said; and as the old man looked up with a start
and saw me, a stranger, walking by his side, all the fervor and the
fancy died from off his face, the fine features shut upon themselves;
and there he was, the meanest, shallowest, most paltry-looking of old
rogues that had ever pulled off a cap to his equal!

he returned my first light questionings with a sullen suspicion,
which gradually thawed, however, as his keen scrutiny took,
apparently, reassuring stock of my face and figure, and we spoke, as
fellow-travelers will, for a few moments on the roads, the weather, and
the prospect of the skies. then i asked him, with small expectation of
much advantage in his answer, "which was the best way to court."

"there are many ways, my son," he said. "you may get there because of
extreme virtue, or on the introduction of peculiar wickedness."

"ah! but i meant otherwise"

"shining wisdom, they say, brings a man to court--or should. and,
god knows, there is no place like court for folly! if thou art very
beautiful thou may come to it, and if thou art as ugly as hell they
will have thee for a laughing-stock and nine-days' wonder. anaximander
went to court because he was so wise, and anaxippus because he was so
foolish; diphilus because he was so slow in penmanship, and antimachus
because he wrote so much and swift. ah, friend! many are the ways.
polypemon lived by plunder, and, because he was the cruelest thief that
ever stripped a wanderer by green cephisus, he came under the notice of
kings and gods; ay, and clytius is famous because he was so faithful;
and the patriotic codrus because he bared his bosom to the foe, and
spendius for a hundred treacheries, and"

"no! no!" i cried, "no more, sir, i entreat. i did not mean to play
footpad to thy capacious memory, and rob your mind of all these just
comparisons, but only to ask, in ordinary material manner, which was
the best way to the palace, which the nearest road, the safest footpath
for a hasty stranger to our good queen's footstool. i have a royal
script to deliver to her."

"what, is it the queen you want to see? why, i am bound that road
myself, and in a few minutes i will show you the pennons glancing among
the trees where they be camped."

"where they be camped?" i exclaimed in wonder. "i thought that was many
a mile from here--in fact, sir, in the great city itself, and yet you
say a few minutes will show us the royal tents."

"oh, what a blessed thing are youthful legs! and were you off to
distant westminster like that, good fellow, ‘to see the queen,'
forsooth, with nothing in thy wallet, and as little in thy head?" and
the old man eyed me under his slouching cap with a mixture of derision
and strange curiosity.

"i tell you, sir," i answered, "i come on hasty business; i am a
messenger of the utmost urgency, and if i am afoot instead of mounted
it is more misfortune than inclination. what brings the queen, if,
indeed, we are so near her, thus far afield?"

"praise heaven, young man, there is no one who knows less of the
goings and comings of her and hers than i do. i hate them," he said
sourly; "a lying swarm of locusts round that yellow jade they call a
queen--a shallow, cruel, worthless crew who stand in the way of light
and learning, and laugh the poor scholar out of face and heart!" and,
muttering to himself, my companion relapsed into a moody silence as we
breasted the last rise. but on a sudden he looked up with something
like a smile wrinkling his withered cheek, and went on: "but you do
not laugh--you have some bowels of compunction within you--you can be
as civil to a threadbare cloak as to a silken doublet. gads! fellow,
there is something about thee that moves me very strangely. art thou of
gentle quality?"

"i have been of many qualities in my time, sir."

"so i guessed, and something tells me we shall see more of one another.
there is a presence about thee that makes me fear--that puts a dread
upon me, why i know not. and then, again, i feel drawn to thee by a
strong, strange sense, as the persian says one planet is drawn toward
another."

i let the old fellow ramble on, paying, indeed, but cold notice to
his chatter, since all my thoughts were on ahead, and when at last we
came out of the hazel dingles, there, sure enough, down in the valley
was a white road winding among the trees, and a stately park, a goodly
house of many windows, and amid the fair meadows among the branches
shone the white gleam of tents, and overhead the flutter of silken tags
and gonfalons, and now and then there came the glint of steel and
gold from out that goodly show, and the blare of trumpets, and more
softly on the afternoon air the shout of busy marshals, the neighing of
steeds, and the low murmur of many voices.

oh, it was a pretty scene to see the tender countryside so fresh and
green, and the rolling meadows at our feet dusted thick with gold
and silver flowers all blended in a splendid web of tissue under the
shining sun. and there the flush of blossom on the orchards streaked
the fair valley like a sunset cloud, and here the bronze of budding
oaks lay soft in the hollows, while overhead the blue canopy of the sky
was one unbroken roof from verge to verge.

we two looked down upon that scene of peace with different feeling for
a space, then, making my friendly salutation to the dreamy pedant,
"here, sir," i said, "i fear we part forever."

"not so," he said: "we shall meet once more, and soon."

"well! well! soon or distant, we will meet again in friendship," and,
with a wave of the hand, off i set, delighted to think chance had so
favored me, and all impatient to tell my news. i did not stop to look
to left or right, but down the glen i ran into the valley, scaring
the frightened sheep and oxen, and stopping not for fence or boundary
until the broad road was reached, and all among the groups of gaping
countrymen and busy lackeys leading out the steeds to water in the
meadows round the royal camp, i slackened my pace. the broad park gates
were open, and inside, amid the oak-trees around the great house, gay
confusion reigned. there, on one hand, were the fair white tents bright
with silk and golden trappings, and, while a hundred sturdy yeomen were
busy setting up these cool pavilions, others spread costly rugs about
their porches, and displayed within them lordly furniture enough to
dazzle such rough soldier eyes as mine. there in long rows beneath
the branches were ranked a wondrous show of mighty gilded coaches with
empty shafts a-trail, all still dusty from the road, and hurrying
grooms were covering these over for the night, while others fed and
tended a squadron of sleek, fat horses, whose beribboned manes and
glistening hides so well filled out struck me amazed when i recalled
those poor, ragged, muddy chargers whereon we had borne down the hosts
of philip's chivalry two days before. all about the green were groups
of gallant gentlemen and ladies, and i overheard, as i brushed by, some
of them speaking of a splendid show to be given that night in the court
of the great house near by, and how the proud owner of it, thus honored
by the great queen's presence, had beggared him and his for many a
day in making preparation. it was most probable, for the white-haired
seneschal was tearing his snowy locks, entreating, imploring, amid a
surging, unruly mass of porters, cooks, and scullions, while heaps of
provender, vats of wine, and mighty piles of food for men and horses,
littered all the rearward avenues.

but little i looked at all these things. clad like many another
countryman come there to see the show (only a little more ragged and
uncouth), i passed the outer wickets, and, skirting the groups of
idlers, strode boldly out across the trim inner lawns and breasted the
wide sweep of steps that led to the great scutcheoned doorway. all down
these steps gilded fellows were lolling in splendid finery, who started
up and stared at me, as, nothing noticing their gentle presence, now
hot upon my errand, i bounded by. at top were two strong yeomen, gay
in crimson and black livery, of most quaint kind, with rampant lions
worked in gold upon their breasts, and tall, broad-bladed halberds in
their hands. they made a show of barring the way with those mighty
weapons; but i came so unexpected, and showed so little hesitation,
they faltered. also, i had pulled off my cap, and better men than they
had stepped back in fear and wonder from a glance of that grim, stern
face that i thus did show them. past these, and once inside, i found
the queen was receiving the country-folk, and up the waiting avenue of
these good rustic lieges i pushed, brushing through the feeble fence
of stewards' marshaling-rods held out to awe, and, nothing noticing a
score of curly pages who threw themselves before me, i burst into the
presence chamber. hoth! 'twas a fine room, like the mid-aisle of a
great cathedral, and all around the walls were banners and bannerets,
antlers of deer, and goodly shows of weapons, and suits of mail and
harness. and this splendid lobby was thronged with courtiers in silks
and satins, while ruffs and stocks and mighty collarets, and pearls and
gems, and cloth of gold and sarsanet glittered everywhere, and a gentle
incense of lovely scents mingled with a murmur of courtly talk went
up to the fair carved oaken ceiling. right ahead of me was a splendid
crimson carpet of wondrous pile and softness, and at the far end of
that stately way a daïs, and on it, lightly chatting amid a pause in
the royal business--the queen!

she was not the least what i had looked for. i had pictured edward's
noble dame, the daughter of the knightly house of hainault, as pale and
proud and dark--the fit wife to her warlike husband, and a meet mother
to her son. but this one was lank and yellow, comely enough no doubt
and tall, with a mighty proud light in her eyes when occasion served,
and a right royal bearing, yet still somehow not quite that which i
expected. what did it matter? was it not the queen, and was not that
enough? gods! what should it count what color was her hair, since my
master found it good enough? and, in truth, but i had something to say
would bring the red into those lackluster cheeks, or philippa were
unlike all other women. therefore, with a shout of triumph that shocked
the mild courtiers, brandishing my precious script above my head, i
leaped forward, and, dashing up that open crimson road, ran straight to
the footstool of the royal lady, and there dropping on one knee:

"hail! royal mother," i cried.

"thanks!" she said sardonically, as soon as she regained her composure.
"thanks, gentle maid!"

"madam," i cried, "i come, a herald, charged with splendid news of
conquest! but one day since, over in famous france, thy loyal english
troops have won such a victory against mighty odds as lends a new
luster even to the broad page of english valor. but one day since, in
your noble general's tent"

but by this time all the throng of courtiers had found their tongues,
and some certain quantity of those senses whereof my sudden entry had
bereft them. while a few, who caught the meaning of my word, and,
stopping not to argue, thought it was the news indeed of a victory
that glittering court had long hoped for, broke out into tumultuous
cheering--waving scarf and handkerchief, and throwing wide the
lattices, that the common folk without might share their noisy joy,
those others who stood closer around, and saw my ragged habiliments,
could not believe it.

"you a herald!" exclaimed one grizzled veteran in slashed black velvet
over pearly satin. "you a messenger chosen for such an errand! madam,"
he cried, drawing out a long rapier from its velvet case, "it is some
madman, some brain-sick soldier. i do implore your grace to let me call
the guards."

"an assassin! an assassin!" cried another. "run him through, lord
fodringham! give him no chance or parley!"

"'tis past belief!" exclaimed a dainty fellow, all perfumed lace and
golden chains. "such glad tidings are not trusted to base country curs."

"a fool!" "a rogue!" "a graceless villain!" they shouted. "stab him!
drag him from the presence! fie upon the billmen to let such scullions
in upon us!" and thick these pretty peers came clustering on me, the
while their ladies screamed, and all was stormy tumult.

up, then, i jumped to my feet, and hot and wrathful, shaking my
clenched fist in the faces of those glittering lords, broke out: "by
the bright light of day, sirs, he who says i have a better here in
this hall, lies--lies loud and flatly. do you think, because i come
clad like this, you may safely spend your shallow wit upon me? i tell
you all, pretty silken spaniels that you are! you, fodringham, with
the gilded toothpick you miscall a sword! you there, sir, who reek
of musk and valor! and all you others, who keep so discreetly out of
arm's reach!--i tell you every one that, in court or camp, in tilt
or tourney, i am your mate! ah, sirs, and this rusty country smock,
blazoned by miry ways and hasty travel; this muddy tabard here, because
'tis upon a herald's breast, is more honorable wear than any silken
surtout that you boast of. gods, gentlemen! if so there be that any
one here in truth misdoubts it, let me entreat his patience; let me
humbly crave the boon that he will hold his mettled valor in curb just
so long as i may render that message which i surely have at this royal
footstool, and then, on horse or foot, with mace or sword, i will show
him my credentials!" but none of that glittering throng had aught to
say. those bold, silken lordlings pushed back in a wide circle from
where i stood, fierce and tall in my muddy rags, and fumbled their
golden dagger-knobs, and studied with drooped heads the dainty silk
rosettes upon their cork-heeled shoes.

after waiting a moment, to give their valor fair chance of answering,
i turned disdainfully from them, and, bending again to fair queen
philippa, "madam," i said, "these noisy boys make me forget the smooth
reverence that i owe your grace, yet surely the noble daughter of
hainault will forgive a hasty word spoken in defense of soldier honor?"

"i know nothing, good fellow," replied the queen, eyeing her
discomfited nobles with inward glee, "of thy hainault, but i like thy
outspokenness extremely. by heaven! you make me think it was some time
since i last saw a man about me."

"and have i leave to do my mission, noble lady?"

"ay, sir, to it at once! we care not how you come, or who you are,
or for the exact condition of your smock, so that you bring news of
victory."

"but, madam," put in fodringham, "it is not safe--he has some desperate
purpose"

"silence!" shouted the queen, springing to her feet and stamping a
pretty foot, cased in a dainty pearl-encrusted slipper--"silence,
i say, lord fodringham, and all you other peers who make our
presence-chamber like a bear-pit: silence! or by my father's heart i
will cure him of insolence who speaks again for once and all." and the
sallow virago, flushing like an angry yellow sunset, with her fierce
gray eyes agleam, and her thin lips stern-set, one white hand clutching
the high carved arm of her daïs, and the other set like white ivory on
the jeweled handle of her fan, scowled round upon her courtiers.

they knew that proud termagant too well to meet her eye, and having
stared them all into meek silence she let the yellow flush die from her
cheek, and turning to me she said: "now, fellow, to thy errand."

"then, sovereign lady," i began, "but two days since, in france, the
english troops, fair set upon a sunny hillside, were attacked by a vast
array of foemen, and thanks to happy chance, to thy princely general's
captainship, and to the incredible valor of thy lieges, they were
victorious!"

"now may the dear god who rules these things accept my grateful and
most humble thanks!" and the proud queen, with bright moisture in her
eye, looked skyward for a moment, and was so moved with true joy and
pleasure in her country's conquest that thereon at once she went up
most mightily in my esteem.

"most welcome of all heralds," she went on, "how fared the english
leader in that desperate fight? if aught has happed to lord leicester,
it will spoil all else that you can say."[4]

[4] the earl of leicester, in the spring of 1586, had command of the
english forces in flanders, and news of the great victory which he
constantly promised but never achieved was daily expected.

i did not quite catch the name she mentioned under breath, but i
thought it was the royal mother asking how my noble young master had
prospered, so i spoke out at once.

"madam, he is unhurt and well! it is not for me, a humble knight,
to praise that shining star of honor, but he for whom thou art so
naturally solicitous" (here the queen blushed a little and looked down,
while there was a scarce-suppressed laugh among the fair damsels behind
me), "he, madam, has done splendid deeds of valor. three times, noble
queen, right along the glittering front of france he charged, three
times he pierced so deep into that sea of steel that he near lay hands
upon their golden lilies in mid-host. the proud count of poligny fell
before him, and the lord of lusigny was overthrown in single combat;
besançon and arnay went down under his maiden spear; he pulled an
ancient crest from the bohemian eagle in mid-battle. in brief, madam,
a more valorous knight was never buckled into armor; he was the prop
and pillar of our host, and to him this victory is as largely due as it
is to any."

"herald," said the queen, with real gratitude and pleasure in her voice
again, "indeed your news is welcome. there was nothing i had rather
than such a victory, and because 'tis his, because it will stifle the
envious clamor of his enemies, and embolden me to do that which i hope
to. oh! your news fills up to overflowing the measure of my joy and
satisfaction!" and the fair lady bent her head and fell into a reverie,
like a maid who cogitates upon the prowess of an absent lover.

so far the woman--then the queen came back, and lifting her shapely
head, with its high-piled yellow hair, laced with strings of amethyst
and pearl, and well set off by the great stiff-starched ruff behind,
she asked:

"and my dear english nobles, and my stout halberdiers and pikemen--god
forgive me that i should forget them!--how told the fight upon them? my
heart bleeds to think of the odds you say they did withstand."

"be comforted, fair sovereign! the tide of war set strong against our
enemies, our palisades and trenches were well laid; the keen english
arrows carried disaster far afield on their iron points ere the battle
joined; the great host of france fell by its own mightiness; and
victory, this time at least, shall wring but few tears from english
maids or matrons."

"heaven be truly thanked for that!"

"indeed, madam"--so i went on--"none of great account fell those few
hours since. lord harcourt i saw bear him like the bold soldier that he
was, and when the battle faded into evening he it was who marshaled
our scattered ranks and set the order for the night."

"who did you say?"

"harcourt, lady, thy bold captain. and codrington, too, was
redoubtable, and came safe from the fight. chandos dealt out death to
all who crossed his path, like an avenging fury, yet took no scratch.
hot lord walsingham swept like an avalanche in spring through the
close-packed frenchmen, yet lives to tell of it, and old sir john
fitzherbert, when i left the field--his white beard all athwart his
shredded broken armor--was cheering loudly for our victory, the while
they lapped him up in linens, for a french axe had shorn his left arm
off at the shoulder. all have taken dints, but near all are safe and
well."

"'tis strange," said the queen, thoughtfully, "'tis strange i know so
few of these. i have a harcourt, but he is not warlike; and cunning,
cruel walsingham lives in the north, and sits better astride of a
dinner-stool than a charger. codrington and fitzherbert leading my
troops to war! here, let me see thy script: it may explain." and she
held out her jeweled hand.

thereon a strange uneasiness possessed me, and seemed to cloud my
honest courage. what was it? what had i to fear? i did not know. and
yet my strong fingers, that never wearied upon a hilt though the day
were ne'er so long, trembled as i slung round my pouch, and my heart
set off a-beating with craven fear, as it had never beat before in
sack or mêlée. it was too foolish; and, a little angry at the blood
that ran so slowly in my veins, and the heavy sense of evil that sat
on me all of a sudden, i pulled the metal letter-case from my wallet,
and burst the seal and pressed the lid. the wallet split from side to
side as though the stout leather were frail paper, and the strong metal
crumbled in my fingers like red, rotten touchwood.

i stared at it in amazement. what could it mean? then shook the thin,
rusty fragments from my hand, and, putting on a bold face i did not
feel, drew out the parchment from the strangely frail casing, brushed
off the dust and litter, and handed it to the sovereign.

"lady," i said in a voice i fain would have made true and clear, "there
is the full account, and though seas have stained it, and rough travel
spoiled the casing, as you saw, yet have i made all diligence i could.
it was yesterday morning king edward gave me that, and ‘take it,' he
said, ‘as fast as foot can go to sweet queen philippa, my wife. say
'twas penned on battlefield, and comes full charged with my dear and
best affections.' thus, madam, have i brought it straight to thee from
famous crecy, and here place it, the warrant of my truth, in queen
philippa's own hand." and then i gave her the scroll.

jove! how yellow and tarnished it did look! the frail silk that bound
it was all afray and colorless; and the king's great seal, that once
had been so cherry-red, was bleached to sickly pallor! the queen took
it, and while i held my breath in nameless terror she turned it over
and slowly round about, and stared first at me, and then at that fatal
thing. she begged a dagger from a courtier at her side, and split the
binding, and unfolded that tawny scroll that crackled in her fingers,
it was so old and stiff, and read the address and superscription; and
then, all on a sudden, while a deathlike silence held the room, she
turned her stern, cold eyes, full of wrath and wonder, to me kneeling
there, and burst out:

"why, fellow! what mummery is all this? philippa and crecy? why, thou
incredible fool! philippa of hainault has been dust these twenty
generations; and crecy--thy ‘famous crecy'--was fought near three
hundred years ago! i am elizabeth tudor!"

slowly i rose from my feet and stared at her--stared at her in
the hush of that wondering room, while a cold chill of fear and
consternation crept over my body. incredible! "crecy fought three
hundred years ago!"--the hall seemed full of that horrible whisper,
and a score of echoes repeated, "queen philippa has been dust these
twenty generations, and crecy--thy famous crecy--was fought near
three hundred years ago!" oh, impossible--cruel--ridiculous!--and
yet--and yet! there, as i stood, glaring at the queen with strained,
set face, and clenched hands, and heaving breath, gasping, wondering,
waiting for something to break that hideous silence or give the lie to
that accursed sentence that still floated round on the ambient air,
and took new strength from the disdainful light in those clustering
courtier eyes, and their mocking, scornful smiles--while i waited i
remembered--by all the infernal powers i remembered--my awakening, and
all the things i should have noted and had not. i recalled the bitter
throes that had wracked my stiff joints in the old british grave as
never mortal rheums yet twisted common sinew and muscle. i recalled
the long labor of the crypt thieves, and the altered face of rocks and
foreshore when my eyes first lit upon them after that long sleep. the
very april season that sorted so ill with the august crecy left behind
took new meaning to me now all on an instant; and my ragged, crumbling
raiment, in shreds and tatters, so ruinous as never salt spray yet made
a good suit in one mortal evening, the strange garb and speech of those
i met, and then this tawny, handsome, yellow lioness on the throne
where should have been a pale, black norman girl. oh! hell and fiends!
but she spoke the truth. i had lain three hundred years in ufner's
stones, and with a wild, fierce cry of shame and anger, one long yell
of pain and disappointment, i tore the cursed wallet from my neck and
hurled it down there savagely at her feet, and turned and fled! past
the startled courtiers--past the screaming groups of laced and ruffled
women--out! out! through the long line of feeble wardens; out between
the glistening lowered halberds of the guards, down the white shining
steps, an outcast and a scoffing-point, down into the road i ran,
under a thousand wondering eyes, as fast as foot could go--not looking
where or how, but seeking only the friendly cover of solitude and the
fast-coming evening, and then, at length, worn out and spent--so sick
in mind and heart i could scarce put one limb before another, i sank
down on a grassy bank, a mile out of sight and sound of that fatal
camp, and dropped my head into my hands and let the fierce despair and
the black, swelling loneliness well up in my choked and aching heart.

chapter xviii

you--happy--across whose tablets a kind fate draws the sponge of
oblivion even while you write, who leave the cup half emptied, and the
feast half finished; you, from whose thoughts ambition passes in warm
meridian glow, who nourish expectation and hope to the very verge of
the unknown; you, who leave warm with the sweet wine of living, your
dim way lit with the shine of love, your fingers locked in the clasp of
friendship; you, to whom all these things gently minister and smooth
the path of the inevitable; you, who die but once and die so easily,
surely cannot comprehend the full measure of my sufferings!

oh! it was horrible and sickening to feel the old world reel and spin
like this beneath my laggard feet; to see crowns and states and people
flit by like idle shadows on a sunny wall; to espouse great quarrels
that set men into wide-asunder camps, and to wake and find the quarrel
long since over and forgotten; to swear allegiance to a king and love
and serve him, and then to find, in the beat of a pulse, that he had
gone and was forgotten; to be the bearer of proud news that should
kindle joy in a thousand thousand hearts, and then to wake when even
the meaning of that news, the very cause and purport of it, was long
since past and gone--it was surely bitter!

and for myself--i, who, as you know, link a ready sympathy with any
cause, who love and live and hope with a fervor which no experience
quenches and no adversity can dim--to be thus cut adrift from all i
lived and hoped for, to be cast like this on to the bleak, friendless
shore of some age, remote, unknown, unvalued--surely it was a mischance
as heavy as any mischance could be!

i had not any friend in all that universe, i said to myself as i lay
and thought sad thoughts upon the grassy mound--a friend!--not one kind
human heart in this hive of human atoms set store by me--not one had
heard i lived--not one cared if i died! there was not in all the world
one question of how i fared, one wish that ran in union with any wish
of mine--one single link to join me to my kind. and what links could
i forge again? how could i set out to hope afresh or love, or fear or
wish for? hope! gods! had i not hopes yesterday? and what were they
now?--a tawdry, silly sheaf of tinseled fancies. and love!--how could
i love, remembering the new-dead isobel?--and fear and desire! neither
touched the accursed monotony of my desolation; either would have been
a boon from heaven to break the miserable calm of my despair!

it was thus i reasoned with myself for hours as the gathering darkness
settled down; and, poor as i had often been, and comradeless, i do not
think, in all a long and varied life, i had ever felt more reft of
friends or melancholy lonesome. in vain my mind was racked to piece
the evidence of that huge lapse of time which, there was no doubt, had
passed since the great battle on the crecy hills. i could recall as
they have been set down every incident of the voyage, my escape, and
what had followed the awakening: but the sleep itself was to me even
now just one long, soft, dreamless, well-earned slumber from point
to point. so absolutely natural had been that wondrous trance that
to think on it would make me start up with a cry, and shake my fist
to where, in the valley, the lights of elizabeth's camp were faintly
shining among the trees, and half persuade myself that this were the
dream--that the yellow-haired princess had somehow mocked me, that
edward indeed still lived, with my jolly comrades, and i might still
hope to win renown and smiles amid them, and see those that i knew, and
drink red wine from friendly flagons. then i would remember all the
many signs that told the princess had not fooled me--had but spoke the
cruel, naked truth--and down i would sink again on the turf under the
deepening shadows, and bewail my lot.

tossed fiercely about like this, time passed unnoticed; the day went
out in the west behind the pale amber and green satin curtains of
the sunset, and, while i sat and grieved, the yellow stars climbed
into the sky, all the sweet silent planets of the night set out upon
their unseen pathways and airy paraboles, and behind the thicket that
sheltered me the moon got up and threw across the lonely road a tracery
of black and silver shadows. the evening air blew strong and cool upon
my flushed, hot brow, and lulled the teeming thoughts that crowded
there. soft velvet bats came down, and the faint lisp of their hollow
wings brushing by me was kindly and sympathetic. overhead, the sallows
hung out a thousand golden points to the small people of the twilight,
and a faint perfume--an incense of hope--fell on me with the yellow
dust of those gentle flowers. if i say these cool influences somewhat
respirited me, you will deride my changing mood. yet why should i
hesitate for that? i did grow calmer under the gentle caressing of the
evening; it was all so fair and still about me presently, and there was
this star that i knew and that; and the night-owl churning overhead
was surely the very same bird that had sung above my hunter-couch
in the saxon woodlands; and the lonely trumpet of the heron, flying
homeward up the valley, brought back a score of peaceful memories.
after all, men might change and go--shallow, small puppets that they
were!--but this, at least, was the same old earth about me, and that
was something. i would find a sheltered corner and sleep. mayhap, with
to-morrow's dawn the world might look a little brighter!

just as this wise resolution was on the point of being put in force,
the faint sound of horse-hoofs, demurely walking up toward my
lurking-place, came down on the night wind, and, retiring a moment into
the deep shadows, i had not long to wait before the same shaggy palfrey
and the same dreamy old fellow met earlier in the day came pacing along
the road. the scholar--for so i guessed him--looked neither to right
nor left; his strange thin face was turned full up to the moonlight,
and the bright rays shone upon his vacant eyes and long white beard
with a strange sepulchural luster. he was letting the reins hang loose
upon his pony's neck, and, as he came near, thinking himself alone,
he stretched out his long, sinewy hands in front; and it was plain to
see his lips worked in the moonlight with unspoken thoughts quicker
than an abbot's at unpaid-for mass. utterly oblivious to everything
around, in the white shine of the great night planet, old, lunatic,
and gaunt, he looked, methought, the strangest wayfarer that ever
rode down a woodland lane by nightfall. he was indeed so weird and
unapproachable in his reverie that, though i had felt a small gleam of
pleasure in first recognizing something which, if not friend, was at
least acquaintance, yet now as he drew nigh, remote and visionary, with
glassy eyes fixed on the twinkling stars, and thin white locks lifting
about his broad and wrinkled forehead, i hesitated to greet him, and
stood back.

but that palfrey he bestrode was more watchful than his rider. he saw
me loom dark among the hazels, and came to so sudden a stop as threw
the old man forward upon his ears, and, whatever his fancies may have
been, jerked them clean from sky to earth in less time than it takes to
write.

the scholar pulled himself together, and, with some show of valor,
threw back his wide cloak from his right shoulder, and uncovered on
his other side the hilt of a tarnished, rusty sword. then, peeping
and peering all about, he cried: "ho! you there in the shadows! be ye
thieves or beggars, know that i have nothing to give and less to lose!"

"and he who stops your way, sir," i answered, stepping forward into the
clear, "is exactly in like circumstance."

"oh! it is you, friend, is it?" cried the old man, seeming much
relieved. "i thought i had fallen into a nest of footpads, or at the
least a camp of beggars."

"your open declaration, sir, backed by certain evidences of its obvious
truth, ought to have taken you safely through the worst infested
thicket hereabouts."

"no doubt, no doubt; but i am glad it is you and not another--first,
because desirable friendships are rarely made by moonlight; and
secondly, because you have been in my mind the few hours since we
parted."

"i am honored in that particular, and your courtesy moves me the more
because i was only now thinking there were none upon the face of the
earth who were doing so much by me."

"you are green, young man, and therefore apt to let a passing whim, a
shadow of disappointment, lead to hasty generalizing. you fared not as
you hoped at yonder court?" and the old man bent his keen gray eyes
upon me with a searching shrewdness there was no gainsaying.

"no! in faith i fared badly beyond all expectation."

"and what were you projecting just now when, like the ass of balaam,
this most patient beast saw you in the way and interrupted my
reflection so roughly?"

"why, at that very moment, sir," i said, "i was looking for a likely
place to pass the night."

"what, on the moss? with no better hangings to your couch than these
lean, draughty, leafless boughs?"

"'tis an honorable bed, sir, and i have fared worse when i have been
far richer."

"oh! what a happy thing it is to be young and full of choler and folly!
not but that i have done the same myself," chuckled the old man: "for
thou knowest mandrake must be gathered only at the full moon, and
hemlock roots are digged in the dark--many a twilight such as this i
spent groping in the murky woods, picking those things that witches
love--and not gone home with full wallet until the owls were homing
and the pale white stars were waxing sickly in the morning light.
nevertheless, sir, take an old man's word, and presume not too largely
on the immunities of youth."

"i have no drier bed."

"no, but i have. come back with me to-night, and i will lodge you safe
and sound until the morning."

"thanks for the proffer! yet this is surely extreme courtesy between
two wayfarers so newly met as we are?"

"and do i, sir," he cried, holding out his thin and shaky palms
there in the pallid light, a gaunt and ragged-looking specter--a
houseless, homeless, visionary vagrant--"do i, sir, seem some
broiling spend-thrift--some loose hedge-companion--some shallow-pated
swashbuckler--hail-fellow-well-met with one and all? i have not said so
much civility as i did just now to any one this twenty years!"

"the more thanks are due from him in whose favor you make so great and
generous exception. is it distant to your lodgment?"

"but a few miles straight ahead of us."

"then i will go with you, for it were churlish to slight so good an
offer out of bare waywardness"; and i tightened my belt, and took the
ragged, ungroomed little steed by the rusty, cord-mended bit, and with
these two strange companions, set out i knew not how or where, and
cared but little.

at first that quaint old man seemed more elated than could reasonably
be expected at having secured me for a guest. he did not openly avow
it, but i was not so young or unread in men but that i could decipher
his pleasure in voice and eye, even while he talked on other subjects.
how this interest came, what he could hope to get or have of me,
however, was well past my comprehension. my dress and rustic garb
spoke me his inferior in place and station, while, certes! my rags
and tatters made me seem poor even after my humble kind. he was a
gentleman, though the sorriest-looking one who ever put a leg across a
saddle. and i? i was afoot, a gloomy, purseless, unweaponed loiterer
in the shadows. what could he need of me that lent such luster to his
eyes, and caused him to chuckle so hoarsely far down in his lean and
withered throat? the morrow no doubt would show, and in the meantime,
being still morose and sad, smarting to have unwittingly played the
fool so much, and full of grief and sorrow, i responded but dully to
his learned talk. feeling this, and being only slenderly attached to
mundane things at best, his mind wandered from me after a mile or
two--his eyes grew fixed and expressionless, his hands dropped, supine
upon the pommel, his chin sank down upon the limp, worn, yellow ruffles
on his chest, and senseless, disconnected murmurs ran from his lips,
like water dripping from a leaky cask.

i let him babble as he liked, and trudged along in silence, leaving
the road to that sagacious beast, who, with drooped head and stolid
purpose, went pacing on without a look either to right or left. and
you will guess my thoughts were melancholy. yesterday i was an honored
soldier, the confidant of a proud, victorious king, the comrade of
a shining band of princely brethren, as good a knight as any that
breathed among a host of heroes, the clear-honored leading star--the
bright example to a horde of stalwart veterans--with all the fair
wide fields of renown and reputation lying inviting before me!--all
the pleasant lethe of struggle and ambition open to my search, and i
had strong, true friends abroad, and loving ones at home--and now!
and now! oh! i beat my hand upon my bosom, and spent impotent curses
on the starlight sky, to think how all was changed--to think how
those splendid princely shadows were gone--how all those sweet, rough
spearmen who had ridden with me, fetlock deep, through the crimson mire
of crecy had passed out into the void, leaving me here desolate, poor,
accursed--this empty hand that trained the spear that had shot princes
and paladins to earth under the full gaze of crownèd christendom,
turned to a low horse-boy's duty, my golden mail changed to a
hedgeman's muddy smock, on foot, degraded, friendless, and forlorn!

but it was no good grieving. my melancholy served somehow to pass
the way, and when, presently, i shook it off again with one fierce,
final sigh, and peered about, we were slowly winding down a dark road
between high banks into a deeply wooded glen lying straight ahead.
i had noticed now and then, as we came along, a twinkling light or
two standing off from the white roadway, amid the deep black shadows
of the evening, and each time had slowed my gloomy stride, thinking
this were the place we aimed for. now it was a shepherd's lonely cot,
high-perched amid the open furze and ling, with a faint red beam of
warmth and light coming from the glowing hearth within. "ah! here we
be!" i thought. "so learning is lodged with fleecy simplicity, and cons
his ovid amid the things the sweet latin loved, or reads bucolic horace
beneath a herdsman's oak!"

but that glum palfrey did not stop, and his fantastic master made no
sign. then it would be a way-side cottage, all criscross-faced with
beam of wood, after the new fashion, and overgrown with rose and
eglantine. "then this is it," i sighed--"a comely, peaceful harborage.
one could surely lie safer from the winds of blustering fortune in this
tiny shell than a small white maggot in a winter-hidden nut." and i put
my hand upon the dim trestle-gate. but stamp--stamp! the steed went on;
and the master never took his chin from off his bosom!

well, we had passed in this way some few small homesteads, and seen the
glow-worm lights of a fair, sleeping tudor village or two shine remote
in the starlight valleys, and then we came all at the same solemn
pace, the same gloomy silence, into that deep-shadowed dell i spoke of.
we dipped down, out of the honest white radiance, between high banks
on either hand, so high that bush and scrub were locked in tangles
overhead and not a blink of light came through. down that strange black
zigzag we slipped and scrambled, the loose stones rattling beneath our
feet, in pitchy darkness, with never a sound to break the stillness but
the heavy breathing of the horse, and now and then the gurgle of an
unseen streamlet running somewhere in the void. we staggered down this
hell-dark pathway for a lonely mile, and then there loomed up from the
blackness on my right hand a moldy, broken terrace wall, all loose and
cracked, with fallen coping slabs and pedestals displaced, and hideous,
stony, graven monsters here and there glowering in the blackness at
us who passed below. two hundred paces down this wall we went, and
then came to an opening. at the same moment the pale moon shone out
full overhead and showed me a gate, a garden, and beyond an empty
mansion, so white, so ruinous and ghastly, so marvelously like a dead,
expressionless face suddenly gleaming over the black pall of the night,
that i tightened my hand upon the snaffle strap i held, and bit my lip,
and thanked my fate it was not there i had to sleep.

yet could i not help staring at that place. the wall turned in on
either side to meet those gates. they had once been noble and well
wrought and gilded, for here and there the better metal shone in spots
amid the wide expanse of rusty iron that formed them, but now they were
like the broken fangs, methought, of some old hag more than aught else.
the left of these two rotten portals never opened, the nettle and wild
creepers were twined thick about its shattered lower bars, while its
fellow stood ajar, with one hinge gone, and sagging over, desperately
envious, it seemed, of the small footway that wound amid the rank wild
herbage past it. and then that garden! jove! was ever such a ghostly
wilderness, such a tangled labyrinth of decay and neglect born out
of the kind, fertile bosom of gentle mother earth? never before had i
seen black cypresses throw such funereal shadows; never had i known
the winter-worn things of summer look so ghoul-like and horrible! but
worst of all was the mansion beyond--a straggling pile, with mighty
chimney stacks, from whence no pleasant smoke curled up, and silent,
grassy courtyards, and lonely flights of broken steps leading to lonely
terraces, and a hundred empty windows staring empty-socketed back upon
the dead white light that shone so straight and cruel on them. oh! it
was all most forlorn and melancholy, surely an unholy place, steeped
deep with the indelible stain of some black story--and i turned me
gladly from it!

i turned, and as i did so the horse came to a sudden stop!--stopped
calm and resolute before that ill-omened portal! this woke his master,
who stared and looked up. he saw the house and gates in the full stream
of the moonlight, and then turned to me.

"welcome!" he cried, "right welcome to my home! ho! ho! you shall
sleep snug enough to-night. look at the shine on it. they have lit up
to welcome us!" and he pointed with a long, fleshless finger to those
ghostly windows! "ho! ho! ho!" came, like a dead voice, the echo of his
laughter out of the blank courtyard depth, and the old man, so strange
and wild, struck his rusty spurs upon the bare sounding ribs of his
beast and turned and rode through the portal.

for one minute i held back--'twas all so grim and tragic-looking, and i
was weak, shaken with grief and fasting, unweaponed and alone--for one
minute i held back, and then the red flush of anger burned hot upon my
forehead to think i had been so near to fearing. i tossed back my black
phrygian locks, and with an angry stride--my spirit roused by that
moment's weakness--strode sternly across the threshold.

down the white gravel way we twined, the loose, neglected path gleaming
wet with night-dew; we brushed by thickets of dead garden things, such
as had once been tall and fair, but now tainted the night air with
their rottenness. we stepped over giant brambles and great fallen
hemlocks--little hedge-pigs, so forsaken was it all, trotting down
the path before us--and bats flitting about our heads. in one place
had been a fountain, and pan himself standing by it. the fountain was
choked with giant dock and cress, wherefrom some frogs croaked with
dismal glee, while pan had fallen and lay in pieces on his face across
the way. so we came in a moment or two to the house, and there my
guide dismounted and pulled bit and bridle, saddle and saddle-cloth
from his pony. that beast turned and stepped back into the shadows of
the desolate garden, vanishing with strange suddenness, but whither i
could not guess. then the old man produced a green-rusty key from under
his belt, and putting it to the lock of the door at top of that flight
of broken steps, which looked as though no foot had trodden them for
fifty years, he turned the rusty wards. the grind and wail of those
stiff bolts had almost human sadness in it, and then we entered a long,
lonely chilly hall. here my guide felt for flint and steel, and i own i
heard the click of the stone and metal, and saw the first sparks spring
and die upon the pavement, with reasonable satisfaction.

'twould have made a good picture, had some one been by to limn it--that
ghastly pale face that might have topped a skeleton, so bloodless
was it, with sharp, keen eyes, a glint in the red glow that came
presently upon the tinder, that strange slouch hat, that ragged,
sorrel, graveyard cloak, and all about the gleam, glancing off the
crumbling finery, the worm-eaten furniture, the broken tile-stones,
the empty, voiceless corridors, the doors set half ajar, the great
carved banisters of the stairway that mounted into the black upper
emptiness of that deserted hall. and then i myself, there by the porch,
watchful and grim, in my sorry rags, the greatest wonder of it all,
eyeing with haughty speculation that old fellow, so ancient and yet so
young, tottering and venerable under the weight of a poor eighty years,
perhaps, while it was three times as much since strong-limbed, supple i
had even sat to a meal! it was truly strange, and i waited for anything
that might come next with calm resignation--a listless faith in the
integrity of chance which put me beyond all those gusty emotions of
hope and fear which play through the fledgling hearts of lesser men.

the red train of sparks lit upon the tinder while i glanced around,
the old man's breath blew them into a flame, and this he set to a
rushlight, then turned that pale flame in my direction as he surveyed
his guest from top to toe. i bore the inspection with folded arms, and
when he had done he said:

"such thews and sinews, son, as show beneath that hempen shirt of
yours, such breadth of shoulder and stalwartness can scarcely be
nourished on evening dew and sad reflections. have you eaten lately?"

"in truth, sir, it was some time ago i last sat to meat," was my
response; "and, whether it be our walk or the night-air, i could almost
fancy your father's father might have shared that meal with me."

"well, come, then, to the banquet-hall--the feast is spread, and, for
guests, people these shadows with whom you will!" and, taking the
rushlight from its socket and hobbling off in front, that strange host
of mine led down the corridor to where a great archway led into the
main chamber of the house.

it was as desolate and silent as every other place, vast, roomy, blank,
and gloomy. all along one side were latticed windows looking out upon
that dead garden, and the moonbeams coming through them threw faint
reflections of escutcheon and painted glass upon the dusty floor. here
and there the panes were broken, and draughts from these swayed the
frayed and tattered hangings with ghostly undulations--ah! and at the
top of the room an open door, leading into unknown blackness, kept
softly opening and shutting in the current, as though, with melancholy
monotony, it was giving admittance to unseen, voiceless company.

but nothing said my friend to excuse all this. he led up the long black
table, with rows of seats and benches fit to seat a hundred guests,
until at the lonely top he found and lit the four branches of a little
oil lamp of green moldy bronze, such as one takes from ancient crypts,
and when the four little flames grew up smoky and dim they shone upon
a napkin ready laid, a flask, a pitcher, and a plate, flanked by a
horn-handled knife and spoon, and an oaken salt-cellar. then the old
carl next went to a cupboard in a niche, and brought out bread on a
trencher, a cheese upon a round leaden dish, and a curious flask of old
italian wine. i stared at my host in wonder, for i could have sworn a
saxon hand had trimmed his knife and spoon, his lamp was etruscan, as
truly as i lived, though heaven only knew how he came by it--and that
pitcher--why, jove! i knew the very roman pottery marks upon it, the
maker's sign and name--the very kiln that glazed it.

he laid a plate for me, and cut the loaf and filled our tankards,
and--"eat!" he said. "the feast is small, but we have that sauce the
wise have told us would make a worse into a banquet."

"thanks!" i said. "i have, in truth, sat to wider spreads, yet this
is more than i could, a few short hours since, have reasonably hoped
for." and so i began and broke his bread, and turned about the cheese,
and poured the wine, and made a very good repast out of such modest
provender. but, as you may guess, between every mouthful i could not
help looking up and about me--at the wise-mad features of that quaint
old man, now far away and visionary, again lost in thought and fantasy;
and then out through the broken mullions into that pallid garden of
white spectral things and inky shadows lying so death-like in the
moonshine; and so once more my eye would wander to the long, somber
hall--the stately high-backed chairs all rickety and moth-eaten, and
the door that gently opened now and then to admit the sighing of the
night-wind, and nothing more!

well! i will not weary you with experiences so empty. at last the most
spectral meal that ever mortal sat to was over, and the old man roused
himself, and, like one who comes reluctantly from deep thought, drained
out his goblet to the dregs, and turned it down and swept the crumbs
into his plate, and standing up, said in somewhat friendly tone: "you
will be weary, stranger guest, and mayhap i am to-night but a poor
host. if it pleased you, i would show you to a chamber, which, though
mayhap somewhat musty, like much else of mine, shall nevertheless be
drier than yon couch of yours out there by the hazel thicket."

"musty or not, good sir, i do confess a bed will be welcome. it must be
near four hundred years at least--that is to say, it must be very long,
my sleepy eyes suggest--since i was lain on one."

"come, then!"

"yet half a minute, sir, before we go. this garb of mine--i do not
deign to advert to its poorness, for my own sake, but it does such
small credit to your honor and hospitality. fortune, in other times,
gave me the right to wear the hose and surtout of a gentleman--if you
had such a livery by you."

the scholar thought a space, then bid me stay where i was, and took the
rushlight and went down the passage. in a few minutes he was back, with
a swathe of faded raiment upon his arm, and threw them down upon the
bench.

"there, choose!" he cried. "it was like a young man to think of
to-morrow's clothing, between supper-time and bed."

the raiment was as mysterious as everything else hereabout. it was all
odds and ends, and quaint old fashions and tags of finery, the faded
panoply of state and pride, the green vest of a forest ranger, the
gaberdine of a marshal of the lists, suits for footmen with the devices
i had seen upon the ruined gates worked on the front in golden thread,
and some few courtly things, such as idle young lords will wear a day
or two and then throw by to wear some newer.

out of the latter i selected a suit that looked as though it would fit
me, and, though a little crumpled, was still in reasonable condition.
this vestment, after the fashion of the time, consisted of tight hose
and much-puffed breeches, a fine silk waistcoat coming far down, and
a loose and ample coat upon it, with wide shoulders and long, tight
sleeves. when i add this suit was of amber velvet, lined and puffed
with primrose satin, you will understand that, saving the certain
moldiness about it i have mentioned, it was as good as any reasonable
man could desire. i rolled it up, and put it under my arm, then turned
to my host with something of a smile at the strangeness of it all.

"a supper, sir," i said, "and shelter; a suit of velvet; and then a
bed! why, surely, this is rare civility between two chance companions
met on a country road!"

"ah!" answered the old man, "and if you were as old as i am, you would
know it is rare, but that such things must, somehow, be paid for," and
he eyed me curiously a moment from under those penthouse eyebrows. "is
there anything more you lack?" he continued. "to-night it is yours to
ask, and mine to give."

"since you put it to me, worthy host," i responded, "there is one
other thing i need--something a soldier likes, whether it be in
court or camp, in peaceful hall like this or on the ridges of dank
battlefield--a straight, white comrade that i could keep close
to me all day, a dear companion who would lie nigh by my side at
night--believe me, i have never been without such."

"and believe me, young man, i cannot humor you. fie! if that's your
fancy, why did you leave yon wanton camp? gads! but they would have
lined you there civilly enough, but iwhat, do you think i can
conjure you a pretty, painted leman for a plaything out of these black
shadows all about us?"

whereat i answered seriously: "you mistake my meaning, sir. it was
no gentle damsel that i needed, but such a companion as i have ever
had--in brief, a weapon, a sword. it was only this i thought of."

i heard the old man mutter as he turned away--"a curse on young men and
their wants--new suits, supper and wine, leman, weapons--oh! it's just
the same with all of them," and he took the taper from the table and
signed to me to follow.

he led me down the hall with its bare, cold flagstones and somber
paneling dimly seen under the feeble gleaming light he carried, and in
a few paces my grim host stopped and held that shine aloft. it shone
redly on a tarnished trophy of arms, chain-mail, and helmets, whence
he bid me choose whatever took my fancy, making the while small effort
to hide his contempt for the obvious eagerness and pleasure with
which i sampled that dusty hoard. after a minute or two i selected a
strong spanish blade, a little light and playful, perhaps, with golden
arabesques all down it, and a pretty fluted hollow for the foeman's
blood, and a chased love-knot at the hilt; yet, nevertheless, a good
blade, and serviceable, with an edge as keen as a lover's eye, and a
temper as true as ever was got into good steel, i thought, as i sprang
it on the tiles, between hammer and anvil. this toledo blade had a
cover of black velvet, bound and hooped with silver bands, and a stout
belt of like kind, nicely suiting that livery i carried upon my arm. i
bound the sword about me, and, after being so long unweaponed, found it
wondrous comfortable and pleasant wear.

"now then, sir host," i cried, "lead on! if this chamber of thine were
in the porch of paradise or in the nethermost pit of hell, i am equally
ready to explore it."

up the gloomy stairs we went, now to right and then to left, by
corridors and passages, until the road we came was hopelessly mazed to
me; and soon my host led to a wider, gloomier avenue of silent doorways
than any we had passed.

"choose!"--he laughed--"choose you a bed! better men than you have
lodged--and died--within these cheerful chambers." and that wild old
man, with furrowed face and mad, sparkling eyes, seeming in that small,
round globe of light like some spectral remnant of the fortunes of his
lonely house, opened door after door for me to note the grim black
solitudes within. in every chamber hung the same staring portraits
on the wall, cold, proud, dead eyes fixed hard upon you wherever you
might look! on every rotten cornice were tattered hangings, half
shrouding those dim cobwebbed windows that gazed so wistfully out upon
the moonlit garden; and dusky panel doors and cupboard casements that
gently creaked and moved upon the sighing draught till you could
swear ghostly fingers played upon the latches; the same stern black
furniture, crumbling and decayed, was in each set straight against the
walls; the same cenotaph four-posted bedsteads with ruined tapestries
and moldy coverlets--"choose," he laughed, with a horrid goblin
laughter that rattled down the empty corridors--"my house is roomy,
though the guests be few and silent."

but, in truth, there was little to choose where all was so alike.
therefore, and not to seem the least bit moved by all this
dreadfulness, i threw down my borrowed clothes and rapier upon the
settle in one of the first rooms we happed upon, and said: "here, then,
good host--and thanks for courteous harborage! what time doth sound
reveillé--what time, i mean, doth thy household wake?"

"my household, stranger, sleeps on forever. they will not wake for
any mortal sunrise, and i spend the long night-hours in work and
vigil"--and he looked at me with the gloomy fanaticism of an absent
mind--"yet you must wake again," he went on after a minute. "i have
something to ask thee to-morrow, perhaps something to show"

"why, then, until we meet again, good-night and pleasant vigils, since
it is to them you go."

"good-night, young man, and sober sleep! remember this is no place to
dream of tilts and tourneys, of lost causes or light leman love"; and,
muttering to himself as he shuffled down the bare, dusty floors, i
heard him pass away from corridor to corridor, and flight to flight,
until even that faint sound was swallowed by the cavernous silence of
the sepulchral mansion, and night and impenetrable stillness fell on
those empty stairways and gaunt voiceless rooms.

chapter xix

i slept all that night a deep, unbroken slumber, waking with the first
glimpse of morning, calm and refreshed, but very sleepily perplexed at
my surroundings. it was only after long cogitations that the thread
of my coming hither took form and shape. when at last i had examined
myself in my antecedents, and reduced them to the melancholy present, i
got up and looked from the window. a fair tract of country lay outside,
deep-wooded and undulating, with pastoral meadows in between the
hangers, and beyond, in the open, that streamlet whose prattle had been
heard the night before lay spread into a broad, rushy tarn overgrown
with green weeds and water things, and then running on through the
flat soft meadows of this hollow where the house was built wound into
the far distance, where it joined something that shone in the low
white light like the gleam of a broader river. it was not a cheerful
morning, for it had rained much, and the chilly mist hung low and still
about these somber-wooded thickets, and the long grass between them;
the sleepy rooks in the nests upon the bare treetops were later to
wing than usual, cawing melancholy from the sodden boughs as though
loth to leave them; and down below nothing sang or moved but the dark
black merle fluttering along the covert side, and the mavis tuning a
plaintive and uncertain note from off the wet fir-tops.

when i had stared my full, and learned little from the outlook, i
donned those clothes that i had borrowed, and they were a happy choice.
they fitted me like a lady's glove, and, as i laced and hooked and
belted them before a yellow mirror let into the black panel of my
chamber door, i could not but feel they looked a goodly fashion for
one of my make and build. i had not seemed so stalwart and so sleek,
so straight in limb and broad in shoulder, since i was a saxon thane.
then i belted on that pretty sword round my nicely tapering middle, and
ran my fingers through my black eastern locks, arranging them trimly
inside my high-standing frill, and took another look or two into the
glass, and then with a derisive smile--a little scornful at the secret
pleasure those fine feathers gave me--i went forth.

surely never did mortal mason build such a house before! the deepest,
densest forest path that ever my hunter's foot had trodden was simple
to those mazes of curly stairs and dim passages and wooden alleys
that led by tedious ways to nothing, and creaking, rotten steps that
beguiled the wanderer by sinuous repetitions from desolate wing to
wing and flight to flight. and all the time that i wrestled with
those labyrinthine mazes in the struggle to reach latitudes i knew,
not a sign could i see of my host, not a whisper could i catch of
human voice or familiar sound in that dusty, desolate wilderness.
such an impenetrable stagnation hung over that empty habitation that
the crow of a distant cock or the yelp of a village cur would have
been a blessed interruption, but neither broke the vault-like, solemn
stillness. from room to room i went, opening countless doors at random,
all leading into spacious, moldy chambers, bare and tenantless,
feeling my way by damp, neglected wall and dangerous broken floorings
to endless cobwebbed windows, unbarring wooden casements and letting
in the watery light that only made the inner desolation more ghostly
conspicuous, but nothing human could i find, nor any prospect but that
same one i had seen before of damp woodlands and marshy water-meadows
out beyond.

perhaps for half an hour had i adventured thus hopelessly, lost in the
dusty bowels of that stupendous building; and then--just as i was near
despairing of an exit and meditating a leap from a casement on to the
stony terraces below--opening one final door, that might well have been
but a household cupboard for the storing of linen and raiment, there,
at my feet, was the great main staircase leading, by many a turn and
staging, to the central hall below! i put, with the point of my sword,
a cross upon the outside of that cupboard-door, so that i might know it
again if need be, and then descended.

had you seen me coming down those tudor steps in that tudor finery--my
hand upon the hilt of my long steel rapier perked behind me, my great
ruffle and my curled mustache, my strong soldier limbs squeezed into
those sweet-fitting satin hose and sleeves, so stern and grim, so
lonely and silent in the white glimmer of the morning shine that came
from distant lattice and painted oriel--you well might have thought me
scarcely flesh and blood--some old tudor ancestor of that old tudor
hall stepped from a painter's canvas just as he was in life, and come
with beatless feet to see what cheer his gross descendants made of it
where he had once lived so noisy and so jolly.

down the steps i came, and into the banquet-hall, empty and deserted
like all else, and so sauntered to the table head where i had supped
the evening before. not one trace of humankind had i seen since the
night, and yet--that little thing quite startled me--the supper had
been cleared away, another napkin spread, another plate, put out with
fruit and bread, and a large beaker of good new milk stood by to
flank them. i stared hard at that simple-seeming meal, and could not
comprehend it. i was near sure the old man had not set it--yet, if he
had, why was there but one plate, one place, one chair, one beaker?
was it meant for me or him? what fingers had pulled that fruit, or
drawn that milk still warm from its source? i would wait, i thought,
and strolled off to the windows, and down them all slowly in turn,
then back again, to idly hum a favorite tune we had sung yesterday at
crecy. but still nothing came or stirred. then i went into the hall and
examined that trophy of weapons and tried them all, and then unbarred
the great door and went out upon the terrace, there to dangle my satin
legs over the balustrades during a long interval of gloomy speculation;
but not a leaf was moving, not a sign or whisper could i see of that
strange old fellow who had brought me hitherto, and now did his duty by
his guest so quaintly.

at last i went back to the dining-place, and regarded that mysterious
meal with fixed attention. "now this," i thought, "is surely spread for
me, and if it is not then it should be. the master of a house may get
him food how and when he likes; but the guest's share is put ready to
his hand. i have waited a long hour and more, the sun is high, surely
that learned pedant could not mean to belay his courtesy by starving
a stranger visitor! no, it were certainly affectation to wait longer:
at the worst there must be more where these good things came from."
and being hungry, and having thus appeased my conscience, i clapped my
sword upon the table and fell to work, and in a short space had made a
light though sufficient meal and cleared everything eatable completely
from the table.

i was the better for it, yet this strange solitude began to weigh
upon me. but a few hours since--surely it was no more--i had been in
a busy camp, bright with all the panoply of war, active, bustling;
and here--why, the white mists seemed creeping through me, it was so
damp and melancholy, the tawny mildew of these walls seemed settling
down upon my spirit. jove! i felt, by comparison of what i had been
and was, already touched with the clammy rottenness of this place, and
slowly turning into a piece of crumbling lumber, such as lay about on
every hand--a tarnished, faded monument to a life that was bygone. oh!
i could not stand the house, and, taking my cap and sword, strolled
down the garden, full of pensive thoughts, morose, uncaring, and so out
into the woods beyond, and over hill and dale, a long walk that set the
stagnant blood flowing in my sleepy veins, and did me tonic good.

leaving the hall where so strange a night had been spent, i strode out
strongly over hill and dale for mile after mile, without a thought
of where the path might lead. i stalked on all day, and came back in
the evening; yet the only thing worthy of note upon that round was
a familiarness of scene, a certain feeling of old acquaintance with
plain and valley, which possessed me when i had gone to the farthest
limit of the walk. at one hilltop i stopped and looked over a wide,
gently swelling plain of verdure, with a grassy knoll or two in sight,
and woods and new wheat-fields shining emerald in the april sunlight,
while far away the long clouds were lying steady over the dim shine
of a distant sea. i thought to myself, "surely i have seen all this
before. yonder knoll, standing tall among the lesser ones--why does it
appeal so to me? and that distant flash of water there among the misty
woodlands a few miles to westward of it? jove! i could, somehow, have
sworn there had been a river there even before i saw the shine. some
sense within me knows each swell and hollow of this fair country here,
and yet i know it not. they were not my saxon glades that spread out
beneath me, and the distant stream swept round no such steep as that
castled mount wherefrom i had set out for crecy." i could not justify
that spark of vague remembrance, and long i sat and wondered how or
when in a wide life i had seen that valley, but fruitlessly. yet fancy
did not err, though it was not for many days i knew it.

then, after a time, i turned homeward. homeward, was it? well, it was
as much thitherward as any way i knew, though, indeed, i marveled as i
went why my feet should turn so naturally back to that gloomy mansion
peopled only by shadows and the smell of sad suggestions. perhaps
my mind just then was too inert to seek new roads, and accepted the
easiest, after the manner of weak things, as the inevitable. be this as
it may, i went back that wet, misty afternoon, alone with my melancholy
listlessness through the damp dripping woods and coppices, where the
dead ferns looked red as blood in the evening glow. i was so heedless
i lost my way once or twice, and, when at length the dead front of the
old house glimmered out of the mist ahead, the early night was setting
in, and that lank, dejected garden, those ruined terraces, and hundred
staring, empty windows frowning down on the grave-green courtyard
stones seemed more forsaken, more mournful-looking even than it had the
night before.

i found the front door ajar, exactly as it was left, and, groping
about, presently discovered the tinder and steel. i made a light, and
laughed a little bitterly to think how much indeed i was at home;
then, in bravado and mockery, unsheathed my sword and went from room
to room, in the gathering dusk, stalking sullen and watchful, with
the gleam of light held above my head, down each clammy corridor and
vault-like chamber; rapped with my hilt on casement and panels, and,
listening to the gloomy echo that rumbled down that ghoulish palace,
i pricked with my rapier-point each swelling, rotting curtain; i
punctured every ghostly, swinging arras, and stabbed the black shadows
in a score of dim recesses. but nothing i found until, in one of these,
my sword-point struck something soft and yielding, and sank in. jove!
it startled me. 'twas wondrous like a true, good stab through flesh
and bone; and my fingers tightened upon the pommel, and i sent the
blade home through that yielding, unseen "something," and a span deep
into the rotten wall beyond; then looked to see what i had got. faugh!
'twas but a woman's dress left on a rusty nail, a splendid raiment
once--such as a noble girl might wear, and a princess give--padded and
quilted wondrously, with yards of stitching down the front, wherefrom
rude hands had torn gold filigree and pearl embroideries, and where the
wearer's heart had beat those rough fingers had left a faded rose still
tied there by a love-knot on a strand of amber silk--a lovely gown once
on a time, no doubt, but now my sword had run it through and through
from back to bosom. lord! how it smelled of dead rose, and must, and
moth! i shook it angrily from my weapon, and left it there upon the
rotten boards, and went on with my quest.

but neither high nor low, nor far nor near, was there to be found the
smallest trace of my host or any living mortal. at last, weary and
wet, and oppressed with those vast echoing solitudes, i went back to
the great hall--passed all the untouched litter i had made in the
morning--and so to the banquet-place. i walked up the long black tables
set solemn with double rows of empty chairs, and lit the lamp that
stood at top. it burned up brightly in a minute--and there beneath i
saw the morning meal had been removed, the supper napkin neatly laid,
and bread, wine, and cheese laid out afresh for one!

so unexpected was that neat array, so quaint, so out of keeping with
the desolate mansion, that i laughed aloud, then paused, for down in
the great vaulty interior of that house the echo took my laughter up,
and the lone merriment sounded wicked and infernal in those soulless
corridors. well! there was supper, while i was tired and hungry i would
not be balked of it though all hell were laughing outside. in the vast
empty grate i made a merry fire with some old broken chairs, a jolly,
roaring blaze that curled about the mighty iron dogs as though glad
to warm the chilly hearth again, and went flaming and twisting up the
spacious chimney in right gallant kind. then i lifted the stopper of
the wine-jar, and, finding it full of a good rhenish vintage, set to
work to mull it. i fetched a steel gorget from the trophy in the hall,
poured the liquor therein, and put it by the blaze to warm. and to make
the drink the more complete i spit an apple on my rapier point and
toasted the pippin by the embers, thus making a wassail bowl of most
superior sort.

i ate, and drank, and supped very pleasantly that evening, while
the strong wind whistled among the chimney-stacks and rattled with
unearthly persistence upon the casements, or opened and shut, now soft,
now fiercely, a score of creaking distant doors. the spluttering rain
came down upon the fire by which i sat in my quaint finery, warming my
tudor legs by that tudor blaze; the tall, spectral things of the garden
beyond the curtainless windows nodded and bent before the storm; loose
strands of ivy beat gently upon the panes like the wet long fingers of
ghostly vagrants imploring admission; the water fell with measured beat
upon the empty courtyard stones from broken gargoyle and spout, like
the fall of gently pattering feet, and the strangest sobbing noises
came from the hollow wainscoting of that strange old dwelling-place.
but do you think i feared?--i, who had lived so long and known so
much--i, who four times had seen the substantial world dissolve into
nothing, and had awoke to find a new earth, born from the dusty ashes
of the past--i, who had stocked four times the void air with all i
loved--i, for whom the shadowy fields of the unknown were so thickly
habited--i, to whom the teeming material world again was so unpeopled,
so visionary, and desolate? i mocked the wild gossip of the storm, and
grimly wove the infernal whispers of that place into the thread of my
fancies.

hour by hour i sat and thought--thought of all the rosy pictures of the
past, of all the bright beams of love i had seen shine for me in maiden
eyes, all the wild glitter and delight of twenty fiery combats, all the
joy and success, all the sorrow and pleasure, of my wondrous life; and
thus thought and thought until i wore out even the storm, that went
sighing away over the distant woodlands, and the fire, that died down
to a handful of white ashes, and the wine-pot, that ran dry and empty
with the last flames in the grate; and then i took my sword and the
taper, and, leaving the care of to-morrow to the coming sunrise, went
up the solemn staircase and threw myself upon the first dim couch in
the first black chamber that i met with.

i threw myself upon a bed dressed as i was, but could not sleep as
soon as i wished. instead, a heavy drowsiness possessed me, and now
i would dream for a minute or two, and then start up and listen as
some distant door was opened, or to the quaint gusts that roamed about
those corridors and seemed now and then to hold whispered conclave
outside my door. it was like a child, i knew, to be so restless; but
yet he who lives near to the unknown grows by nature watchful. it did
not seem possible i had fathomed all the mystery there was in that
gloomy mansion, and so i dozed, and waked, and wondered, waiting in
spite of myself for something more all in the deep shadow of my rotten
bed-hangings; now speculating upon my host, and why he tenanted such a
life-forsaken cavern, and ate and drank from ancient crockery, and had
store of moldy finery and rusty weapons; and then idly guessing who had
last slept on this creaking, somber bed, and why the pillows smelled so
much of moldiness, and mildew; or again listening to the wail of the
expiring wind among the chimneys overhead, and the dismal sodden drip
of water falling somewhere. perhaps i had amused myself like that an
hour, and it was as near as might be midnight: the low, white moon was
just a-glimpse over the sighing treetops in the wilderness outside. i
had been dozing lightly, when, on a sudden, my soldier ear distinctly
caught a footfall in the passage without, and, starting up upon my
elbow in the black shadow of the bed, i gripped the hilt of the sword
that lay along under the pillows and held my breath, as slowly the door
was opened wide, and, before my astounded eyes, a tall, dark figure
entered!

it was all done so quietly that, beyond the first footfall and the soft
click of the lifting latch, i do not think a sound broke the heavy
stillness that, between two pauses of the wind, reigned throughout the
empty house. very gently that dusky shadow by my portal shut the door
behind, and it might have been only the outer air that entered with
him, or something in that presence itself, but a cold, damp breath of
air pervaded all the room as the latch fell back.

i did not fear, and yet my heart set off a-thumping against my ribs,
and my fingers tightened upon the fretted hilt of my toledo blade as
that thing came slowly forward from the door, and, big and tall, and
so far indistinct, stalked slowly to the bed-foot, touching the posts
like one who, in an uncertain light, reassures him by the feel of
well-known landmarks, and so went round toward the latticed window. i
did not stir, but held my breath and stared hard at that black form,
that, all unconscious of my presence, slowly sauntered to the light
and took form and shape. in a minute it was by the lattice and, to
my stern, wondering awe, there, in the pale white moonshine, looking
down into the desolate garden beyond with melancholy steadfastness, was
the figure of a tall, black spanish gallant. in that white radiance,
against the ebony setting of the room, he was limned with extraordinary
clearness. indeed, he was a great silver column now of stenciled
brightness against the black void beyond, and i could see every point
and detail in his dress and features as though it were broad daylight.
he was--or must i say, he had been?--a tall, slim man, long-jointed and
sparse after the manner of his nation, and to-night he wore something
like the fashion of his time--black hose and shoes, a black-seeming
waistcoat, a loose outdoor hood above it, a slouch cap, a white ruffle,
and a broad black-leather belt with a dagger dangling from it. so
much was ordinary about him, but--jove!--his face in that uncertain
twilight was frightful! it was cadaverous beyond expression, and tawny
and mean, and all the shadows on it were black and strong; and out of
that dreary parchment mask, making its lifelessness the more deadly by
their glitter, shone two restless, sunken eyes. he kept those yellow
orbs turned upon the garden, and then presently put up a hand and
began stroking his small pointed beard, still seeming lost in thought,
and next, stretching out a finger--and, hoth! what a wicked-looking
talon it did seem!--the shape began drawing signs upon the mistiness
of the diamond panes. at the same time he began to mutter, and there
was something quaintly gruesome about those disconnected syllables in
the midnight stillness; yet, though i leaned forward and peered and
listened, nothing could i learn of what he wrote or said. he fascinated
me. i forgot to speak or act, and could only regard with dumb wonder
that outlined figure in the moonlight and the long-dead face so
dreadfully ashine with life. so bewitched was i that had that vision
turned and spoken i should have made the best shift to answer that
were possible; there was some tie, i felt, between him and me more
than showed upon the surface of this chance meeting of ours--something
which even as i write i feel is not yet quite explained, though i
and that shadow now know each other well. but, instead of speaking,
that presence, man or spirit, from the outer spaces, left off his
scratching on the window, and, with a shrug of his spanish shoulders
and a malediction in guttural bisque, turned from the window-cell and
walked across the room. as he did so i noticed--what had been invisible
before--in his left hand a canvas bag, and, by the shape and weight of
it, that bag seemed full of money. i watched him as he stalked across
the room, watched him disappear into the shadow, and then listened,
with every sense alert, to the click of the latch and the creak of the
door as he left my chamber by the opposite side to that whereat he
entered.

as those faint, ghostly footsteps died away slowly down the corridor,
my native sense came back, and, in a trice, i was on foot, dressed as
i had lain me down, and, snatching my sword and cloak in a fever of
expectation, i ran over to the window and looked upon the writing. it
was figures--figures and sums in ancient moorish arabesque; and the
long, sharp nail-marks of that hideous midnight mathematician were
still penciled clearly on the moonlit dew.

my blood was now coursing finely in my veins, and, hot and eager to
see some more of this grim stranger, i strode across the room and
stepped out into the passage. at first it seemed that he had gone
completely, for all was so still and silent; but the white light
outside was throwing squares of silver brightness from many narrow
windows on the dusty floor--and there he was, in a moment, crossing
the farthest patch, tall and silvery in that radiance, with his long,
slim, black legs, his great ruffle, and flapping cloak--looking most
wicked. i went forward, making as little noise as might be, and seeing
my ghostly friend every now and then, until when we had traversed
perhaps half that deserted mansion i lost him where three ways divided,
and went plunging and tripping forward, striving to be as silent as i
could--though why i know not--and making instead at every false step a
noise that should have startled even ghostly ears. but i was now well
off the trail, and nothing showed or answered. it was black as hell in
the shadows, and white as day where the moonbeams slanted in from the
oriels, and through this chilly checker i went, feeling on by damp old
walls and worm-eaten wainscoting; slipping down crumbling stairs that
were as rotten as the banisters which went to dust beneath my touch;
opening sullen oaken doors and peering down the dreary wastes within;
listening, prying, wondering--but nowhere could i find that shadowy
form again.

i followed the chase for many minutes far into a lonely desert wing of
the old house, then paused irresolute. what was i to do? i had my cloak
upon one hand, and my naked rapier was in the other; but no light, or
any means of making one. the vision had gone, and i found, now that
the chase had ended, and my blood began to tread a sober measure, it
was dank, chilly, and dismal in these black, draughty corridors. worse
still, i had lost all count and reckoning of where my bed had been,
and, though that were small matter in such a house, yet somehow i
felt it were well to reach the vantage-ground of more familiar places
wherein to wait the morning. so, as nearly as was possible, i groped
back upon my footsteps by tedious ways and empty chambers, low in heart
and angry; now stopping to listen to the fitful moaning of the wind or
the pattering rain-spots on the grass, or some distant panels creaking
in distant chambers; half thinking that, after all, i had been a fool,
and cozened by some sleepy fancy. and so i went back, dejected and
dispirited, until presently i came to a gloomy arch in a long corridor,
tapestried across with heavy hangings. unthinkingly i lifted them,
and there--there, as the curtains parted--thirty paces off, a bright
moonlit doorway gently opened, and into the light stepped that same
black-browed foreigner again!

i did what any other would have done, though it was not
valiant--stepped back against the niche and drew the tapestry folds
about me, and so hidden waited. down he sauntered leisurely straight
for my hiding-place, and as he came there was full time to note every
wrinkle and furrow on that sullen, ashy face! hoth! he might have been
a decent gentleman by daylight, but in the nightshine he looked more
like a week-dead corpse than aught else, and, with eyes glued to those
twinkling eyes of his, and bated breath and irresolute fingers hard-set
upon my pommel-hilt, i waited. he came on without a pause or sign to
show he knew that he was watched, and, as he crossed the last patch of
light, i saw the bag of gold was gone, and the hand that had carried
it was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief. another minute and we were
not a yard apart. what good was valor there, i thought? what good were
weapons or courage against the malignity of such an infernal shadow?
i held back while he passed, and in a minute it was too late to stop
him. yet, i could follow! and, half ashamed of that moment's weakness,
and with my courage budding up again, i started from my hiding-place,
and, brandishing my rapier, my cloak curled on my other arm as though
i went to meet some famous fencer, i ran after the spaniard. and
now he heard me, and, with one swift look over his shoulder and a
startled guttural cry, set off down the passage. from light to light
he flashed, and shadow to shadow, i hot after him, my courage rampant
now again, and all the bitterness and disappointment of the last few
days nerving my heart, until i felt i could exchange a thrust or two
with the black arch-fiend himself. 'twas a brief chase! at the bottom
of the corridor stood a solid oak partition--i had him safe enough. i
saw him come to that black barrier, and hesitate: whereon i shouted
fiercely, and leaped forward, and in another minute i was there where
he had been--and the corridor was empty, and the paneled partition was
doorless and unmoved, and not a sound broke the stillness of that old
house save my own angry cry, that the hollow echoes were bandying about
from ghostly room to room, and corridor to empty corridor!

chapter xx

a bright dazzle of sunshine roused me with the following sunrise.
i rubbed my sleepy lids and sat up, vaguely gazing round upon the
tarnished hangings, the immovable white faces of the pictures on the
wall, and the dusty floor whereon, in the grayness of countless years,
was marked just the outlines of last night's feet, and nothing more.
however, it was truly a lovely morning, and, moved by that subtle tonic
which comes with sunshine, i felt brighter and more confident.

having dressed, i went down the old staircase again to the breakfast
which would certainly be ready, unbarring as i passed the casements and
setting wide the great hall door, that the cool breath of that spring
morning might sweep away the mustiness of the old house, even humming a
snatch of an old camp song, learned in picardy, to myself the while.
thus, i gained the dining-hall in good spirits, and saw, as had been
expected, a new meal set with modest food and drink for me, and me
alone, but no other sign or trace of human presence.

i sat and ate, vowing as i did so this riddle had gone far enough
unanswered, and before that shiny, sparkling world outside (all tears
and laughter like a young maid's face) was a few hours older i would
know who was my host, who served me thus persistent and invisible,
and what might be the service i was looked to to pay for such quaint
entertainment. therefore, as soon as the meal was done, i belted on my
sword and straightened down my finery, the which had lost its creases
and sat extremely well, and, smoothing the thick mass of my black
eastern hair under my velvet tudor cap, sallied forth.

there was nothing new about the garden save the sunshine, and, having
intently regarded the broad-terraced and mullioned front of the house
without learning one single atom more than i knew before, i resolved
to force a way round to the rear if it were possible. but this was not
so easy. on one hand were thickets of shrub and bramble laced into
dense, impenetrable barriers, and on the other great yew hedges in
solemn ranks, with vast masses of ivy and holly forbidding a passage.
but, nothing daunted, i walked down to these yews, and peering about
soon perceived a tangled pathway leading into their fastness. it was
a narrow little way, begrudgingly left between those sullen hedges,
thick-grown with dank weeds below, and arched over by neglected growth
so that the sun could not shine into these dusky alleys, and the paths
were wet and chilly still.

well, i pushed on, now to right and now to left, amid the tangles of
one of those old mazes that gardeners love to grow, and until only the
tall smokeless chimney-stacks of the deserted house shone red under
the sunshine over the bough-tops in the distance, and then i paused.
it was all so strangely quiet, and so lonesome--i had been solitary so
long, it seemed doubtful whether any one was alive in the world but
me--why, surely, i was thinking, there were no human beings at least
about this shadow-haunted spot. it were idle to seek for them. i would
give it up. and just as i was meditating that--had half turned to go,
and yet was standing irresolute--jove! right from the air in front of
me, right out from the black bosom of the shadowy yew and ivies, there
burst a wild elfin strain of laughter, a merry bubbling peal, a ringing
cascade of fairy merriment, a sparkling avalanche of disembodied
mirth, that, like some sweet essence, permeated on an instant all
that gloomy place, and thrilled down the damp alleys, and shook the
thousand colored drops of dew from bent and leaf, and vibrated in the
misty prismatic sunshine up above, and then was gone, leaving me rooted
to the ground with the suddenness of it, and half delighted and half
amazed. but only for a moment, and then i leaped forward and saw a
turning, and found at bottom of it a gap, and plunged headlong through!

it was a pretty scene i staggered into. in front of me spread the open
center of the maze, a grassy space some twenty paces all about, and
lying clear to the sunshine falling warm and strong upon it. in the
midst of that fair opening, shut off from wind and outer barrenness,
had once been a fountain with a basin, and, though the jet played
no longer, yet the white marble pool below it, stained golden and
green with moss and weather, held from brim to brim a little lake
of sparkling water. and about that fountain, bright in decay, the
green ferns were unwinding, while great clumps of gold narcissus hung
trembling over their own reflection in the broken basin. overhead,
there was a blossoming almond-tree, a cloud of pale-pink buds wherefrom
a constant cheerful hum of bees came forth, and a pale rain of petals
fell on to the ground beneath and tinted it like a rosy snow. no
other way existed in or out of that delightful circle save where i
had entered, but little paths ran here and there among the grass, and
industrious love had marked them out with pretty country flowers--pale
primroses all damp and cool among the shadows, broad bands of purple
violets lining seductive alleys, splendid starlike saffron outshining
even the gorgeous sun, and blushing daisies, with varnished kingcups
where the fountain ran to waste. it was as pretty a dominion--as sweet
an oasis in that dank, dark desert beyond--as you could wish to see,
and the clear, strong breath of flowers, and the warm wine of the
sunshine set my blood throbbing deep and swift to a new sense of love
and pleasure as i stood there spellbound on the dewy threshold.

but, fair as earth and sky looked in that magic circle, they were not
all. kneeling at the broken marble fountain, her dainty sleeves rolled
to pearly elbows, the strands of her loose brown hair dipping as she
bent over the shining water, with white muslin smock neatly bunched
behind her, a milky kerchief knotted across her bosom, and a great
country hat of straw by her side, knelt a fair young english girl. she
did not see me at once, her face was turned away, and on her other hand
she was tending a noble peacock, a splendid fowl indeed--as stately
as though he were the suzerain of all heaven's chickens--ivory white
from bill to spurs, crested with a coronet of living topaz, and with
a mighty fan upreared behind him of complete whiteness from quill
to fringe, saving the last outer row of gorgeous eyes that shone in
gold and purple and amethyst refulgent in that spotless field!--a
magnificent bird indeed, and fully wotting of it--and that kneeling
maid was dipping water for him in her rosy palm, and the great bird
was perched upon the marble rim and dropping his ivory beak into that
sweet chalice and lifting his lovely throttle and flashing coronet to
the sky ever and anon, while the thrill of the girl's light laughter
echoed about the place, and the almond-blossoms showered down on them,
and the bees hummed, and the sweet incense of the spring was drawn from
the warm, budding earth, flowers glittered, the sun shone, and the sky
was blue, as i, the intruder, stood, silent and surprised, before that
dainty picture.

in a moment the girl looked up and saw me in my amber suit and ruffle,
my rapier and cap, standing there against the black framing of the
maze; and then she did as i had done--stared, and rubbed her eyes, and
stared again! in a moment she seemed to understand i was something more
than a fancy, whereat, with a little scream of fear, she sprang to her
feet, and, crossing the kerchief closer on her bosom, pulled down her
sleeves and backed off toward the almond-tree. but i had that comely
apparition fairly at bay, and, after so many hours without company, did
not feel a mind to let her go too easily, whether she proved fay or
fairy, nymph, naïad, or just plain country flesh and blood.

i pulled off my cap, and, with a sweeping bow, advanced slowly toward
her, whereon she screamed again.

"fair girl," i said, "i grieve to interrupt so sweet a picture with
my uninvited presence, but, wandering down these paths, your laughter
burst upon the stillness and drew me here."

"and now, sir," quoth that fair material sprite, recovering herself,
and with a pretty air, "you would ask the shortest way to the public
road. it lies there to your left, beyond the hollybank you see over by
the meadows."

"why, not exactly that," i laughed. "i have an idle hour or two on
hand, and, since you seem to have the same, i would rather rest content
with the good fortune which brought me hither than try new paths for
lesser pleasures. if you would sit, i think this grassy mound is broad
enough for two."

i meant it well, but the maid was timid, and far from rescue in the
wilderness of that maze. the color mounted to her cheeks until they
were pinker than the almond-buds overhead. she looked this way and
that, and gave one fleeting glance round the strong, close-set walls
of that sunny garden among the yews, then just one other glance at me,
that dangerous stranger in silk and satin, standing so gallant, cap in
hand, and finally she was away, running like a hind toward the only
outlet, the gap by which i had come in. but was i to be robbed of a
pretty comrade so? was the lovely elf of the neglected garden to slip
between my fingers without answering one single question of the many i
would ask? i spun round upon my heels, and, quick as that maiden's feet
were on the turf, mine were quicker. we got to the gap together, and,
in another minute, her kirtle fluttering in the breeze, her loose hair
adrift, and the flush of fear and exertion on her youthful face, that
comely lady was struggling in my grasp.

i held her just so long as she might recognize how strong her bonds
were, then set her free. if she had been pink before, that maid was now
ruddier than the windflowers in the grass. "oh, fie, sir!" she began,
as soon as she could get her breath. "oh, fie, and for shame! you wear
the raiment of a gentleman, you carry courtly arms, you do not look at
least a rough, uncivil rogue, and yet you burst into a privy garden and
fright and offend a harmless girl--oh! for shame, sir!--if gentleness
and courtesy are so poor barriers, we shall need to look the better to
our hedges--let me by, sir!" and, gathering her skirts in her hand and
tossing back her head with all the haughtiness she could command, that
damsel looked me boldly in the eyes.

fair, foolish girl! she thought to stare me down--i, who had eyed
unmoved a thousand sights of dread and wonder--i, who had mocked the
stare of cruel tyrants and faced unblanching the worst that heaven or
hell could work--what! was i to be out of countenance under the feeble
battery of such gentle orbs as those? 'twas boldly conceived, but it
would not do, and in a moment she felt it, and her eyes fell from mine,
the color rushed again from brow to chin, she let her flowered skirt
fall from her grip, she turned away for a moment, and there and then
burst out a-crying behind her hands as though the world were quite
inside out.

now, to stand the fair open assault of her eyes was one thing, but such
sap as this was more than my resolution could abide. "you do mistake
me, maid, indeed," i cried. "i swear there is no deed of courtesy or
good-will in all the world i would not do for you."

"why, then, sir, do the least and easiest of all--stand from that gap
and let me pass."

"if you insist upon it, even that i must submit to. there!--there is
your way free and unhampered!" and i stood back and left the passage
clear--"and yet, before you go, fair lady, let me crave of your
courtesy one question or two, such as civility might ask, and courtesy
very reasonably answer."

now that maid had dried her tears, and had been stealing some sundry
glances at me under the fringe of her wet lashes while we spoke, and
as a result she did not seem quite so wishful to be gone as she had
been. she eyed the free gap in the tall wall of yew and holly, and
then, demurely, me. the pretty corners of her mouth began to unbend,
and while her fingers played among her ribbons, and the color came and
went under her clear country skin, feminine curiosity got the better of
timidity, and she hesitated.

"oh!" she murmured, "if it were a civil question civilly asked, i could
wait for that. what can i tell you?"

"first then, are you of true material substance, not vagrant and
spiritual, but, as you certainly look, a healthy, plain planed mortal?"

"had i been else, sir," the damsel answered, with a smile, "i had found
a short way out of the trap you saw fit to hold me in."

"that is true, no doubt, and i accept this initial answer with due
thanks. i had not asked it, but lodging so long amid shadows sets my
prejudice against the truth, even of the sweetest substance."

"and next, sir?"

"next, how came you in this lonely place, with these pretty playthings
about you? how came you in my garden here, where i thought nothing but
silence and sadness grew?"

"your garden! what hole in our outer fences gave you that warrant,
sir?" queried the young lady, with a toss of her head. "how long user
of trespass makes that right presumptive? faith! until you spoke i
thought the garden was mine and my father's!" and the young lady, for
such i now acknowledged her to be, looked extremely haughty.

"what! hast thou, then, a father?"

"yes, sir. is it so unusual with our kind that you should be surprised?"

"and who is thy father?"

"a very learned man indeed, sir; one who hath more wit in his little
finger than another brave gentleman will have in all his body. of
nature so courteous that he instinctively would respect the privacy of
a neighbor's property and manners, so finished he would never stay a
maiden at her morning walk to bandy idle questions with her all out of
vanity of black curled hair and a new, mayhap unpaid-for, yellow suit.
if you had no more to ask me, sir, i think, i would wish you good-day."

"but stay a minute. it seems to me i might know thy father; and this is
the very point and center of my inquisitiveness."

"if you did, it were much to your advantage, but i doubt it. he is
recluse and grave, not given to chance companions, or, in fact, to
friend with any but some one or two."

"ah! that may well be so," i said thoughtlessly, speaking with small
consideration and recalling the vision of my ancient host just as it
came to me--"a sour, wizened old carl, clad in rusty green, a-straddle
of a spavined, ragged palfrey; mean-seeming, morose, and sullen--why,
maid, is that thy father?"

"no, sir!"

"gads!" i laughed, "it was discourteously spoken. i should have said,
now i come to reflect more closely on it, a reverent gentleman, indeed,
white-bearded and sage, with keen eyes shining severe, the portals of
a well-filled mind. a carriage that bespoke good breeding and gentle
blood; raiment that disdained the pomp of silly, fickle fashion, and a
general air of learning and of mildness."

"my father, sir, to the very letter, master adam faulkener, the wisest
man, they say, this side of the trent, and greatly (i know he would
have me add) at your service."

"and you?"

"i am mistress elizabeth faulkener, daughter to that same; and if,
indeed, you know my father, then, as my father's friend, i tender you
my humble and respectful duty," and the young lady half mockingly, and
half out of gay spirit, picked up her flowered muslin skirt, by two
dainty fingers, on either side and made me a long, sweeping curtesy.

a pretty flower indeed, for such a rugged stem!

"but this is only half the matter, fair girl," i went on, when my
responding bow had been duly made. "if that venerable gentleman indeed
be thy father, and this his house and thine, it is more strange than
ever. i came here two evenings since by his explicit invitation, but
since that time i have not set eyes upon him. high and low have i
hunted, i have pricked arras and rapped on hollow panels, trodden yon
ghostly corridors at every hour of the day and night, yet for all that
time no sight or sound of host or hostess could i get. now, out of thy
generous nature and the civility due to a wondering guest, tell me how
was this."

"why, sir! do you mean to say since two nights past you have been
lodged back there?"

"ah! three days, in yon grim, moldy mansion."

"what! there, in that melancholy front of the many windows--and all
alone?"

"the very simple, native truth!--alone in yonder tenement of faint, sad
odors and mournful, sighing draughts, alone save for a mind stocked
with somewhat melancholy fancies--mislaid by him, it seemed, who
brought me thither--dull, solitary, and damp--why, damsel!"

and, in faith, when i had got so far as that, the maiden sank back
upon a grassy heap and hid her face behind her hands, and gave way to
a wild, tumultuous fit of laughter, a golden cascade of merriment that
fell thick and sparkling from the sunny places of her youthful joyance,
as you see the heavy rain-drops glint through a bright april sky; a
wild, irresistible torrent of frolic glee that wandered round the
faroff alleys, and raised a hundred answering echoes of pleasure in
that enchanted garden.

presently the maid recovered, and, putting down her hands, asked--"and
your meals--how came you by them?"

"they were laid for me twice each day in the great hall by unseen
hands, most punctual and mysterious. 'twas simple fare, but sufficient
to a soldier, and each time i cleared the table and went afield, when i
came back it was reset; yet no one could i see--no sound there was to
break the stillness"

again that lady burst into one of her merry trills, and, when it was
over, signed me to sit beside her. i was not loth. she was fair and
young and tender--as pretty an amaryllis as ever a country corydon did
pipe to. so down i sat.

"now," said she, "imprimis, sir, i do confess we owe you recompense
for such scant courtesy; but i gather how it happened. this is, as i
have said, my father's house, and mine; and time was, once, it has been
told me, when he had near as many servants as i have flowers here, with
friends unending; and all those blank windows, yonder, were full of
lights by night and faces in the day. then this garden was trim--not
only here but everywhere--and great carriages ground upon the gravel
drive, and the courtyard was full of caparisoned palfreys. that was all
just so long ago, sir, that i remember nothing of it."

"i can picture it, damsel," i said, as she sighed and hesitated; "and
how came this difference?"

"i do not know for certain--i have often wondered why, myself--but my
father presently had spent all his money, and perhaps that somehow
explained it," sighed my fair philosopher. "then, too, he took
studious, and let his estate shift for itself, while he pored over
great tomes and learned things, and hid himself away from light and
pleasure. that might have scared off those gay acquaintances--might it
not, sir?" queried the lady so unlearned in worldly ways.

"it were a good recipe, indeed," was my answer: "none better! to grow
poor and wise is high offense with such a gilded throng as you have
mentioned. so then the house emptied, and the gates no longer stood
wide open; the garden was forsaken, and grass grew on thy steps; owls
built in thy corridors--a dismal picture, and sad for thee, but this
does not explain the strange entertainment i have had. where is your
father lodged? and you--how is it we have not met before?"

"oh," said the damsel, brightening up again, "that is easily
explained. when his friends left him, my father dismissed all his
servants but one--a spanish steward--and good old mistress margery, my
nurse (and, saving my father, my only friend), then lodged himself back
yonder in the far rear of our great house, and there i have grown up."

"like a fair flower in a neglected spot," i hazarded.

"ah! and secure from the shallow tongues of silly flatterers, old
margery tells me. now, my father, as you may have noted, is at times
somewhat visionary and absent. it thus may well have happened that,
bringing you here a guest, he would by old habit have taken you, as he
was so long accustomed, to the great barren front and lodged you so.
once lodged there, it is perfectly within his capacity to have utterly
forgot your very existence."

"but the meals--for whom were they spread, if not for me?"

"why, simply for my father. he has, where he works, a cupboard, wherein
is kept brown bread and wine, and, sometimes, when studious studies
keep him close, he goes to it and will not look at better or more
ordered meals. then, again, when the fancy takes him, he will have
a place put for himself in the great deserted hall, and sups there
all alone. now, this has been his mood of late, and i can only fancy
that when you came the whim did change all on a sudden, and thus you
inherited each day that which was laid for him, who, too studious, came
not, and old slow-witted margery, finding every time the provender was
gone, laid and relaid with patient remembrance of her orders."

"a very pretty coil indeed!--and i, no doubt, being sadly wandering
afield all day, just missed thy ancient servitor each time."

"and had you ever come in upon her heels you would have seen her hobble
up one silent corridor and down another, and press a button on a panel,
and so pass through a doorway that you would never find alone, from
your tenement to ours. oh, it makes me laugh to think of you pent
there! i would have given a round dozen of my whitest hen's eggs to
have been by to see how you did look."

"that had been a contingency, fair maid, which had greatly lightened my
captivity," i answered; and the lady went babbling on in the prettiest,
simplest way, half rustic and half courtly in her tones, as might be
looked for in one brought up as she had been.

for an hour, perhaps, we lay and basked in the pleasant warmth, while
the rheums of melancholy and dampness were slowly drawn from me by the
sun and that fair companionship, then she rose, and, shaking a shower
of almond petals from her apron, re-knotted her kerchief, and, taking
a look at the sky, said it was past midday and time for dinner. if i
liked, she would guide me to her father. up i got, and, side by side
with that fair elizabethan girl, went sauntering through her flowery
walks, down past shrubberies and along the warm red old wall of her
great empty house, until we came into a quiet way overgrown with giant
weeds and smelling sweet of green sheep's parsley and cool, fair
vegetable odors. here the maid lifted a latch, and led me through a
well-hidden gateway into the sunny rearward courtyard.

it showed as different as could be from the dreary front. the ground
was cobblestones all neatly weeded round a square of close-cut grass.
on one side the great black wall of the manor-place towered windowless
above us, with red roofs, mighty piles of smokeless chimney-stacks and
corbie steps far overhead; and, on the other hand, at an angle to that
wall, were lesser buildings to left and right, enclosing the grass plot
and shining in the sun, warm, lattice-windowed, quaint-gabled. the
third side of the square was open, and sloped down to fair meadows,
beyond which came flowering orchards, bounded by a brook. moreover,
there was life here, plain, homely, honest country life. the wild,
loose-hanging roses and eglantine were swinging in the sunshine over
the deep-seated porches of these modest places; the lavender smoke
was drifting among the budding branches overhead, proud maternal hens
were clucking to their broods about the open doorways; there were
blooming flowers growing by one deep-set window--ah! and fair mistress
elizabeth's snowy linen was all out on cords across that pretty sunny
courtyard, struggling in sparkling, white confusion against the loose
caresses of the april wind.

"and look you there," cried mistress faulkener, when she saw it,
pointing far down the distant meadows, "'tis there we keep our milk
and cows--oh! as you are courteous, as you would wish to deserve your
gentle livery, count those cattle for a minute," and thereat, while
i, obedient, turned my back and mustered the distant beasts grazing
knee-deep among the yellow buttercups--she outflew upon those linens,
and pulled them down and rolled them up in swathes, and set them on
a bench; then tucked back some disheveled strands of hair behind her
ears, and, somewhat out of breath, turned to me again.

"here," she said, "on this side lives old margery and our steward,
black emanuel marcena; there, on the other, is my room--that one with
the flowers below and open lattices. next is my father's; below, again,
is the room where we do eat; and all that yonder--those many windows
alike above, and those steps going down beneath the ground--those
half-hidden cobwebbed windows ablink with the level of the turf--that
is where my father works."

"by all the saints, fair girl!" i exclaimed impetuously, as she led
me toward that place, "thy father's workshop is on fire! see the gray
smoke curling from the lintel of the doorway, and the broken panes--and
yonder i catch a glint of flame! here, let me burst the door!" and i
sprang forward.

but the lady put her hand upon my arm, saying with a somewhat rueful
smile, "no, not so bad as that--there is fire there, but it is servant
not master. come in and you shall see." she took me down six damp stone
steps, then lifted the latch of a massy, weather-beaten, oaken doorway,
and led me within.

it was a vast, dim, vaulted cellar. the rough black roof of rugged
masonry was hung by vistas of such mighty tapestries of grimy cobwebs
as never mortal saw before. on the near side the row of little windows,
dusty and neglected, let in thin streams of light that only made the
general darkness the more visible. all the other wall was rough and
bare; beset with great spikes and nails wherefrom depended a thousand
forms of ironware, and ancient useless metal things, the broken, rusty
implements of peace and war. the floor seemed, as i took in every
detail of this subterranean chamber, to be bare earth, stamped hard
and glossy with constant treading, while here and there in hollows
black water stood in pools, and gray ashes from a furnace-fire margined
those miry places. it was a gloomy hall, without a doubt, and as my
eyes wandered round the shadows they presently discovered the presiding
genius.

in the hollow of the great final arch was a cobwebbed, smoke-grimed
blacksmith's forge and bellows. the little heap of fuel on it was
glowing white, and the curling smoke ascended part up the rugged
chimney and part into the chamber. on one side of this forge stood a
heavy anvil, and by it, as we entered, a man was toiling on a molten
bar of iron, plying his blows so slow and heavy it was melancholy to
watch them. that man, it did not need another glance to tell me, was my
host! if he had looked gaunt and wild by night, the yellow flicker of
the furnace and the pale mockery of daylight which stole through his
poor panes did not improve him now. the bright fire of enthusiasm still
burned in his keen old eyes, i saw, but they were red and heavy with
long sleeplessness; his ragged, open shirt displayed his lean and hairy
chest, stained and smudged with the hue of toil; his arms were bare to
the elbow, and his knotted old fingers clutched like the talons of a
bird upon the handle of the hammer that he wielded. grim old fellow!
he was near double with weariness and labor; the breath came quick
and hectic as he toiled; the painful sweat cut white furrows down his
pallid, ash-stained face; and his wild, gray elfin locks were dank and
heavy with the foul fumes of that black hole of his. yet he stopped
not to look to left or to right, but still kept at it, unmindful of
aught else--hammer, hammer, hammer! and sigh, sigh, sigh!--with a fine
inspired smile of misty, heroic pleasure about his mouth, and the light
of prophecy and quenchless courage in his eyes!

it was very strange to watch him, and there was something about
the unbroken rhythm of his blows, and the inflexible determination
hanging about him, that held me spellbound, waiting i knew not for
what, but half thinking to witness that red iron whereinto his soul
was being welded spring into something wild and strange and fair--half
thinking to witness these sooty walls fall back into the wide arcades
of shadowy realm, and that old magician blossom out of his vile rags
into some splendid flower of humankind. it was foolish, but it was an
unlearned age, and i only a rough soldier. that fair maid by my side,
more familiar with these strange sights and sounds, roused me from my
expectant watching in a minute.

she had come in after me, had paused as i did, and now with pretty
filial pity in her face, and outspread hands, she ran to that old man
and laid a tender finger upon his yellow arm, and stayed its measured
labor. at this he looked up for the first time since we entered, as
dazed and sleepy as one newly waked, and, seeing that he scarce knew
her, elizabeth shook her head at him, and took his grizzled cheeks
between her rosy palms, and kissed him first on one side and then on
the other, kissed him sweet and tenderly upon his pallid unwashed
cheeks, and then, with kind imperiousness, loosed his cramped fingers
from the hammer-shaft and threw it away, and led him by gentle force
back from his forge and anvil. "oh, father!" she said, bustling round
him and fastening up his shirt and pulling down his sleeves, and
looking in his face with real solicitude, "indeed i do think you are
the worst father that ever any maid did have," and here was another
kiss. "oh! how long have you worked down here? two nights and days
on end. fie, for shame! and how much have you eaten? what? nothing,
nothing all that time? did ever child have such a parent? oh! would
to heaven you had less wisdom and more wit--why, if you go on like
this, you will be thinner than any of these spiders overhead in
springtime--and weary--nay, do not tell me you are not--and, oh! so
dirty, alack that i should let a stranger see thee like this!" and,
taking her own white kerchief from her apron, that damsel wiped her
father's face in love and gentleness, and stroked his gritty beard and
smoothed, as well as she was able, his ancient locks, then took him by
the hand and pointed to me, standing a little way off in the gloom.

at first the old man gazed at the amber-suited gallant shining in the
blackness of his workshop, stolidly, without a trace of recognition,
but, when in a minute or two by an effort he drew his wits together, he
took me for one of those gay fellows, who, no doubt, had haunted his
courtyards and spent his money in brighter times, and taxed me with it.
but i laughed at that and shook my head, whereon he mused--"what! are
thou, then, young john eldrid of beaulieu, come to pay those twenty
crowns your father borrowed twelve years since?"

no! i was not john eldrid, and there were no crowns in my wallet. then
i must be lord fossedene's reeve come to complain again of broken
fences and cattle straying, or, perhaps, a bailiff for the queen's
dues, and, if that were so, it was little i would get from him.

thereon his daughter burst out laughing and stroking the old man's
hand. "oh, father," she said gently, "you were not always thus
forgetful. this excellent gentleman i found trespassing among my
flowers, and did arrest him; he is your guest, and declares you brought
him here two nights since, lodging him in our empty front, where he has
subsisted all this time on melancholy and stolen meals. surely, father,
you recall him now?"

the old man was puzzled, but slowly a ray of recollection pierced
through the thick mists of forgetfulness. indeed, he did remember, he
muttered, something of the kind, but it was a sturdy, shrewd-looking
yeoman, tall, and bronzed under his wide cap, a rustic fellow in
country cloth that he had brought along, and not this yellow gentleman.
so then i explained how he had resuited me, and jogged his memory
gently, lifting it down the trail of our brief acquaintance as a good
huntsman lifts a hound over a cold scent, until at last, when he had
given him a cup of red wine from his cupboard in the niche, his eyes
brightened up, the vacuity faded from his face, and, laughing in turn,
he knew me; then, holding out two withered hands in very courteous
wise, old andrew faulkener welcomed me, and in civil, courtly speech,
that seemed strange enough in that grim hole, and from that grizzly,
bent, unwashed old fellow, made apology for the neglect and seeming
slight which he feared i must have suffered.

we spoke together for some minutes, and then i ventured to ask, "was
there not something, master faulkener, you had to tell or ask of me? i
do remember you mentioned such a wish that evening when we parted, and
certain circumstances of our short friendship make me curious to know
what service it is i have to pay you in return for the hospitality your
goodness put upon me."

"in truth there was something," faulkener answered, with a show of
embarrassment, "but it was a service better sought of frieze than silk."

"tell it, good sir, tell it! it were detestable did silk repudiate the
debts that honest frieze incurred."

"why, then, i will, and chance your displeasure. sweet bess, get thee
out and see to dinner. this gentleman will dine with me to-day!" and
as mistress elizabeth picked up her pretty skirts and vanished up the
grass-grown steps the old recluse turned to me.

chapter xxi

"now, look you here, sir," the old philosopher began, taking me by a
tassel on my satin doublet, and working himself up until his eyes shone
with pleasure, as he unfolded his mad visions to me. "look you here,
sir! this bare and dingy dungeon that you rightly frown at is a cell
more pregnant with ingenuity than ever was the forge of the lame smith
of lemnos. vulcan! vulcan never had such teeming fancies as i have
harbored in my head for twenty years. vulcan never coaxed into being
such a lovely monster as i have hidden yonder. i tell you, young man,"
gasped the old fellow, perspiring with enthusiasm, "prometheus was a
tawdry charlatan in his service to mankind, compared with what i will
be. he gave us fire, crude, rough, unruly fire!--unstable, dangerous--a
bare, naked gift, spoiled even in the giving by incompleteness; but i,
sir--i have tamed what the bold son of clymene only touched. ah, by
the blessed gods! i think i have tamed it--fire and water, i have wed
them at yon black altar--deadly foes though some do call them, i have
made them work together, the one with the other. oh, sir, such servants
were never yet enlisted by our kind since the great day of cyclops! and
to think these feeble shaking hands whose poor sinews stand from the
wasted flesh like ivy strands about a winter tree, have done it--and
this poor head has thought it, persistent and at last successful,
through bitter months of toil and anguished disappointment!"

"but, sir," i said gently, as the old man checked his incoherent speech
for breath--"this monster, sir, this ‘lovely monster,' what is it?"

"ah! i was forgetting you did not know. look, then! and though you
had been unfamous all your life, this moment of precedent knowledge
above your fellows shall make you forever famous." and the old man,
like a devotee walking to a shrine, like a lover with hushed breath
and brightly kindling eye stealing to his mistress's hiding-place, led
me up to a cavernous recess near the forge, and there lay hands upon a
rent and tattered drapery of rough sail-cloth, stained and old, and,
making a gesture of silence, pulled it back.

in the dim, weird enchantment of that place, i had been prepared for
anything. it was a knightly fashion of the times to be credulous, and
that black cobwebbed den, that mad philosopher, so eloquently raving,
and all the late circumstance of my arrival fitted me to look for
wonders. i had followed him across the grimy floor, pitted with gray
pools of furnace-water, through the reek and twining strands of smoke
that filled that nether hall; and lastly, when he laid a finger to
his lip, and, so reverent and awful, drew back that ancient tattered
screen, i frowned a little, stepping back a pace, and drew my ready
sword six inches from its scabbard, and watched expectant to see some
hideous, horrid, living form chained there--some foul offspring of
darkness and accursed ingenuity--some hateful spawn of wizard art and
black mother night--some squat, foul, misshapen caliban--some loathsome
thing--i scarce knew what, but strong and sullen and monstrous, for
certain! and, instead, the screen ran rattling back, and there before
me, in a neat-swept space, and on a platform of oaken planks--glossy
in new forged metal, shiny with untarnished filings, gleaming in the
pride of burnished brass and rivets--high, bulby, complicated, a maze
of pistons and levers and wheels, was a great machine!

somehow, as i saw that ponderous monster, so full of cunning although
so lifeless, a tremor of wondering appreciation ran through my mind,
that soulless body fascinated me with a prophetic fear and awe which
at another time and in another place i should have laughed at.

i put back my sword, smiling to think it had been so nearly drawn,
but yet stood expectant, half wondering, half hoping i knew not what,
and gazing raptly on that mighty iron carcass perched there like some
black incubus, almost fancying all the love and fear and hope that
had gone to fashion its steel limbs or iron sinews might indeed have
filled it with a soul that should, as i looked, become articulate and
manifest beneath my eyes; half hoping, in my ignorance, that indeed the
quintessence of human labor, here consummate, might have got on all
that plastic, dull material, some wondrous firstling spirit of a new
estate, some link between the worlds of substance and of shadow! and
if it so fascinated me, that old man, to whom it owed its being, was
even more enthralled. he stood before the shrine with locked hands and
bent head, apostrophizing the silent work. "oh, child of infinitely
painful conception," he muttered, "surely--surely you cannot disappoint
me now! near twenty years have i given to you--twenty years of toil
and sweat and ungrudging hope. long, hot summers have i worked upon
you, and dank, dull winters, making and unmaking, building and taking
down again, contriving, hoping, despairing, living with you by day and
dreaming of you through nights of fitful slumber--surely, dear heir of
all my hopes, the reward is at hand, the consummation comes!

"see!" he cried, "how perfect it is! here in this great round
cylinder is room for fire and water. the fire lies all along in that
gulley-trench that you can note here through this open trap, and those
curling pipes take the hot flame up through that void that will be
filled with the other element. now, when water boils, the vapor that
comes from off the top is choleric and fiery past conception. this has
been known for long, and john homersham tried to utilize it by letting
the vapor on the spread digits of a wheel; farinelli of angoulême
suffered it to escape behind his engine--both ways so wasteful that no
mortal furnace could keep up power sufficient to be of useful service.
but i have bettered these and many others; nothing is wasted here--the
hot gases are stored and stocked as they rise above the boiling liquid
until they are as strong as the blustering son of astræus and aurora,
and then, by turning one single tap, i suffer them to escape down
yonder iron way, there to fall upon the head of that piston that with
a mighty send gives before them and spins the great wheel above, and
comes back on the impetus, and takes another buffet from the laboring
vapor, and back it goes again, now this way and now that, twirling with
fiery zeal those notched wheels above, and working all those bars and
rods and pistons. not one thing of all this complicated structure but
has its purpose; not one rivet in yonder thousands but means a month of
patient, toilsome thought and labor. moreover, because it is so strong
and heavy, i have put the whole upon that iron carriage, which took me
a year to forge, and those solid back wheels are locked with the gear
above, and from the axle of that front wheel two chains run up and
turn upon a cylinder, so that my sweet one can move at such pace as
yet i cannot even think of, and guide himself--in brief, is born and
consummate!"

then, presently, he turned from babbling to his "child," and speaking
louder, with frenzied gestures, the while he strode up and down before
it, went wild upon the wondrous things it should do. "it will not
fail, i know it! my head is fairly mazed when i forecast all that here
with this begins as possible. it shall run, sir," he cried, turning
rapturously to me--"and fly, and walk, and haul, and pull, and hew
wood and draw water, and be a giant stronger than a thousand men, and
a craftsman in a hundred crafts of such subtility and gentleness and
cunning as no other master craftsman ever was. down, into ages not yet
formed in the void womb of the future, this knowledge i have mastered
shall extend, widening as it goes, and men shall no longer strive or
suffer; there stands the patient beast on whose broad back another
age shall put all its burdens. there is the true winged horse of some
other time that shall mock the slow patter of our laggard feet, and
knit together the most distant corners of the world within its giant
stride. oh! i can see a happy age, when base material labor shall
be over, and men shall lie about and take their fill of restfulness
as they have not done since the gates of eden were shut upon their
ancient father's back! i do see, down the long perspectives of the
future, such as yon achieving all things both by sea and shore, plowing
their fields for unborn peoples and drawing nets, carrying, fetching,
far and near, swift, patient, indomitable! ah! and winging glorious
argosies--mighty vessels such as no man dares dream of now; vast, noble
bodies inspirited each with a soul as lies impatient yonder; and those
shall plow the green sea waves in scorn of storm and weather, pouring
the wealth of far cathay and ind into our ready lap, making those
things happy necessaries which now none but some few may dare to hope
for; bringing the spice the persian picked this morning to our doors
to-morrow, bringing the grape and olive unwithered on their stems,
bringing fair eastern stuffs still wet from out their dye-vats"

"jove, old man! that moves me. i was a merchant once. your words do
stir my blood down to the most stagnant corner of my veins!"

"--bringing pearls from oman still speckled with the green sea-dew
upon them, and sapphires from rugged ural mines still smelling of their
fresh native mother earth; bringing, in swift, tireless keels, nova
zemblan furs and costly feathered trophies from the south; bringing
biafra's hoards of ivory and benin's stores of blood-red gold; bringing
gems warm from tepid sands of arracan, and sandal-wood from seagirt
nicobar. ah! pouring the yellow-scented corn of every fertile flat from
manfalout to ancient abbasiyeh; pouring the tartar's millet and the
hindu's rice into our hungry western mouths; making those rich who once
were poor, and those noble who once were only rich; benefiting both
great and little--benefiting both near and far! and i shall have done
this--i, poor master andrew faulkener, a man so shabby and so seeming
mean, no one of worth or quality would walk in the same side of the
road with him!"

so spoke that good fanatic, and as he stopped there came a gentle tap
upon the door, and a fair face in the sunlight, and there was mistress
elizabeth saying, with a merry laugh: "father! the cloth is laid, and
the meal is spread, and old margery bids me add that, if to-day's roast
is spoiled by waiting, as the last one was, she'll never cook capon for
thee again!" and coming down the maid laid a hand of gentle insistence
upon her father's sleeve, and led him sighing and often looking back up
the green stone steps, i following close behind.

we crossed the sunny courtyard, entering on the farther side the other
rambling buttress-wing of that ancient pile. thence we went by clean
white flagstoned passages and open oaken doorways to what was once
the long servants' dining-hall. at the near end of the middle table
of well-scrubbed boards, so thick and heavy they might have come from
the side of some great ship, a clean white slip cloth was laid, with
high-backed chairs, one at the head for andrew faulkener, and two on
either side for me and her, and lower down again were put, below the
great oaken salt-cellar, two other places. by one of these stood dame
margery, fair elizabeth's old nurse, an ancient dame in black-velvet
cap and spotless ruff and linen, with a comely honest old country face
above them, wrinkled and colored like a rosy pippin that has mellowed
through the winter on a kitchen cornice shelf. such was dame margery,
and, while she curtsied low with folded hands, i bowed as one of my
quality might bow in respect to her ancient faithfulness. at the other
chair stood their spanish steward, black emanuel marcena. yes, and,
as you may by this time have guessed, that steward was, in flesh and
blood, none other but the midnight visitor who had disturbed my rest
the night before. i could not doubt it. he wore the same clothes,
his swarthy, sullen face was only a little more lifelike now in the
daylight, and, if more evidence were wanting, one finger of his left
hand--that hand that had held the bloody handkerchief--was done up with
cobwebs and linen threads. i knew him on the instant, and stopped and
stared to see my vagrant shadow so prosaically standing there at his
dinner place, picking his yellow teeth and sniffing the ready roast
like a hungry dog. and when he saw me he too started, for i also had
been dreadful to him. i was the exact counterpart of that amber gallant
that had strode out upon his moonlit heels and scared him with a shout,
where, no doubt, he fancied no shouters dwelt, and now here we were
face to face, guests at the same table, surely it was strange enough to
make us stare!

but, over and above the prejudice of our evening meeting, i already
distrusted and disliked emanuel marcena. why it was i do not know,
but so much is certain, if one may love, no less surely may one hate
at first sight, and as our eyes met, hatred was surely born in his,
while mine, as like as not, told through their steady stare, of
aversion and dislike. he was a sullen, yellow fellow, lean and tall,
with black, crafty eyes set near together; a thin nose, shaped like a
vulture's beak; a small peaked beard, and black hair closely cropped,
a crafty, cunning, cruel, ungenerous-looking fellow, who had somehow,
it afterward turned out, grown rich as his master's fortunes failed. he
had come into faulkener's service when a boy, had flourished while he
flourished, and learned a hundred shifts of cruelty and pride from the
gay company who once were proud to call his master comrade, and now,
like the black fungus that he was, had swelled with conceit and avarice
past all conscionable proportions.

well, we exchanged grim salutations, and sat, and the meal commenced.
but all the while we ate and talked i could not help turning to that
crafty steward, and each time i did so i found his keen, restless
black eyes wandering fugitive about among us. now he would glance
at me over his porringer, and then a half-unconscious scowl dropped
down over those dark cordovian brows. then perhaps it was the old man
he looked at, and a scarce-hid smile of contempt played about the
corners of that southern's mouth to hear his master babble or answer
our talk at random. lastly, my sleek iberian would set his glance on
sweet country bess as she sat at her father's side, and then there
burned under his yellow skin such a flush of passion, such a shine
of sickly love and aspiration as needed no interpreting, and made me
frown--small as my stake was in that game i saw was playing--as black
as inky night. but what did it matter to me who picked that english
blossom? why should she not lie on that mean spanish bosom forever if
she would?--'twas less than nothing to me, who would so soon pass on to
other ventures--and yet no man was ever born who was not jealous, and,
remembering how we had met, how sweet she was and simple, what native
courtesy gilded her country manners, what music there was in her voice,
and how black that villain looked beside her, i, in spite of myself,
resented the first knowledge of the love he bore as keenly as though i
had myself a right to her.

pious, sanctimonious emanuel marcena! he stood up saying his grace
for meat long after all of us were seated, and crossed his doublet a
score of times ere he fell on the viands like a hungry pike. and he was
cruel too. a little thing may show how big things go. he caught a fly
while we waited between two courses, and, thinking himself unnoticed,
held it a moment nicely between his lean, long fingers, then, drawing
a straight fine pin from his sleeve, slowly thrust it through the
body of that buzzing thing. he stuck the pin up before him, by his
pewter mug, and watched with lowering pleasure his victim gyrate. that
amused him much, and when the creature's pain was reduced to numbness
he neatly tore one prismatic wing from off its shoulder, and smiled a
sour smile to watch how that awoke it. then, presently, the other wing
was wrenched palpitating from the damp and quivering socket, and the
victim spun round upon the iron stake that pierced its body. and all
this under cover of his dinner-mug, ingenious, light-fingered emanuel
marcena!

such was the steward of that curious household. over against him sat
the excellent old country dame, whose mind wandered no further than to
speculate upon the price of eggs next market-day, or how her bleaching
linen fared; above was the wise-mad scholar, bent and visionary; and
by him, ruddy in her country beauty, that wild hedge-rose of his. and
as i looked from one to other, and thought of what i was and had been,
all seemed strange, unreal, fantastic, and i could only wait with dull
patience for what fortune might have next in store.

it was a pleasant, peaceful place, that manor hall! when we had
finished our midday meal, and the servitors had gone to their duties,
master faulkener said a walk in the green fields might do him good--he
would go out and take the country air. it was a wise resolve, and
he made a show of carrying it through, but he had not crossed the
courtyard toward the sunny meadows when he got a sniff of his own
smoldering furnace fires. that was too much for him. the scholar's
rustic resolution melted, and, glancing fugitively behind, we saw him
presently steal away toward his cellar, and then drop down the stairs,
and bar the door, and soon the curling smoke and dancing sparks told
that wondrous thing of his was growing once again.

thus i and the maid were left alone, and for a little space we stood
silent by the diamond-latticed window, scarce knowing what to say--i
looking down upon that virgin bosom, so smoothly heaving under its veil
of country lawn, she thinking i know not what, but pulling a leaf or
two to pieces from her window vine. and so we stood for a time, until
the lady broke the silence by asking if i would wish to see the house
and gardens with her? it was a good suggestion and a comely guide, so
we set out at once.

she led me first back through her garden again, naming every flower
and bush by country names as we went along, and this brought us to the
empty house-front, which we entered. she took me from room to room, and
dusty corridor to corridor, chatting and laughing all the way, talking
of great kinsmen, and noble, fickle guests who once had called her
father friend--all with such a light, contented heart it sounded more
like fairy story than stern material fact. then that tripping guide
showed me the one door i had not found, which led through into the
rearward house. here, again, i told her of how i had hunted in vain for
such a passage, and she laughed until those ancient corridors resounded
to her glee. this door admitted to another region, which we entered,
and soon elizabeth led on down a dusty flight of twilight wooden
stairs, until a portal studded with iron barred our way. at this,
putting a finger to her mouth in mysterious manner, the damsel asked if
i dared enter, to which my answer was that, with sword in hand, and her
to watch, i would not hesitate to prise the gates of hell; so we pulled
the heavy sullen bolts, and the door turned slowly on its hinges. there
before us was displayed a long, dusty corridor, lit by high narrow
cobwebbed lattice windows down one side, and dim with moss and stain
of wind and weather. from end to end of that soundless vestibule were
stacked and piled and hung such mighty stores of various lumber, rare,
curious, dreadful, as never surely were brought together before.

it was andrew faulkener's museum-room--the place where he put by all
the strange shreds of life and death he collected when the scholar's
fervor was upon him, and now, as his sweet daughter laid one finger on
my arm and softly bid me listen, directly down below and under us we
heard him hammering at his forge.

"oh, sir," began that maid, whispering in my ear and sweeping her
expressive arm round in the direction of those mounds and shelves, "did
ever child have such a father? this is the one room that is forbidden
me, and it is the one room of our hundreds that i take the most fearful
pleasure in. i do wrong to show it, and, indeed, i had not brought you
here but that something tells me you are good comrade, true and silent
both in great and little. therefore step lightly and speak small: there
is nothing in all the world that stirs my father's choler but this--to
hear a vagrant foot overhead among his treasures."

softly, therefore, as any midnight thieves we trod the dust-carpeted
floor, and now here, now there, the damsel led me. now it was at one
oriel recess where stood a black oak table and open chests piled with
vellum books, all clasped and bound with gold and iron, that we paused.
and i opened some of those great tomes, and read, in norman-latin,
or old frankish-french, the misty record of those things of long-ago
that once had been so new to me. i spelled out how the monkish scribe
was stumbling through a passage of that diary that i had seen cæsar
write--saw him repeat, as visionary and incredible, in quaint and
crabbed cloister scrawl, the story of the saxon coming, and how king
harold died. i turned to another book, a little newer, and read, 'mid
gorgeous uncials, the story of that remote fight above crecy, "when
good king edward, with a scanty band of liegemen, was matched against
two hundred thousand french abou ye ville of crecy, and by the grace of
god withstood them upon an august day"--and i could have read on and on
without stop or pause down those musty memory-rousing pages but for the
gentle interrupter at my side, who laughed to see me so engrossed, and
shut the covers to, little knowing of the thoughts that i was thinking,
and took me on again.

then she would halt at a pile of splendid stuffs, half heaped upon the
floor, half nailed against the wall, the hangings of courtly rooms and
thrones; and, as her sympathetic female fingers spread out the folds of
all those ruined webs, i read again upon them, in tarnished gold and
filigree, in silken stitching and patient, cunning embroidery, more
stories of old kings and queens i once was comrade to. on again, to
piles and racks of weapons of every age and time: all these i knew, and
poised the javelin some saxon hand had borne in war, and shook, like
a dry reed, the long norman spear, and whirled a rusty pirate scimitar
above my head until it hummed again an old forgotten tune of blood
and lust and pillage, and, with a stifled shriek, the frightened girl
cowered from me.

oh! a very curious treasure-house indeed! and here the scholar had
laid up skins and furs of animals, and there horns and hoofs and
talons. here, grim, melancholy, great birds were standing as though in
life, and crumbling, as they waited, with neglect and age. there, in
a twilight corner, glimmered the green glassy eyes of an old thebeian
crocodile, and there the shining ivory jaws of monstrous fishes, with
warty hides of toads, and shriveled forms of small beasts dried in
the kiln of long-silent ages, and now black, shrunken, and ghastly.
on the walls were pendent enough simples and electrices to stock
twenty witches' dens, enough mandrake, hellebore, blue monkshood,
purple-tinted nightshade to unpeople half a shire; and along by them
were withered twigs and leaves would banish every kind of rheum;
samples of wondrous shrubs and roots, all neatly docketed, would cure
a wife of scolding or a war-horse of a sprain, would cure an adder's
bite, or by the same physic mend a broken limb; ah, and bring you
certain luck in peace and war, or light, all out of the same virtue,
the fires of love in icy, virgin bosoms.

in that quaint ante-room, dimly illumined by its cobwebbed windows,
were astrolabes and hemispheres from the cabin poops of sunken
merchantmen; charts whereon great beasts shared with pictured savages
whole continents of land, and dolphins and whales did sport where seas
ran out into unknown vagueness. there were models of harmless things of
foreign art and commerce, and cruel iron jaws and wheels with bloody
spikes or beaks for breaking bones or tearing flesh, and teaching the
ways of fair civility to heretics. that old man had got together twenty
images of baal from as many lands, and half a hundred bits of divers
saints. here, tied with the strand of the rope that hanged him, was the
skin of a dead felon, and near was the true shirt of a martyr whom the
church had canonized a thousand years before. in some way, too, the
scholar had possessed him of a pharaoh still swaddled with his memphian
robes, and there he was propped up against the wall, that kingly ash
with mouth locked tight, whose lightest whisper once had made or marred
in every court or camp from dusty ababdah to green euphrates, and brows
set rigid, whose frown had once cost twenty thousand lives, made twenty
thousand wives to widows, and eyes shut fast that seemed still to dream
of shadowy empery--of golden afternoons in golden ages--a most ancient,
a most curious fellow, and i stared hard at him, feeling wondrous
neighborly.

but i cannot tell all there was in that strange place. from end to end
it was stocked with learned lumber; from end to end my sweet guide led
me, pointing, whispering, and shuddering, all on tiptoe and in silence;
and then, ere i was nearly satisfied, or had sampled one-quarter of
that dusty treasure-hall, she led me through a little wicket, down
twenty stairs, and so once more into the fresh open air.

"there, sir," she said, "now i have laid bare my father's riches to
you. is it not a wonderful corridor? oh! what a full place the world
must be, if one man can gather so much strange of it!"

i told her that indeed it was and had been full, right back into the
illimitable, of those hopes and fancies to which all yonder shreds did
hint of; and thus talking, i of infinite experience watching the sweet
wonder and vague speculation dawning in those unruffled child-eyes of
hers, we sauntered about the gardens and pleasant paths, and spent a
sunny afternoon in her ambient fields.

chapter xxii

he who has not left something sad behind him, and reawoke in the
sunshine to feel the golden elixir of health and happiness moving in
his veins anew, may take it that he has at least one pleasure yet
unspent.

i opened my eyes the next morning in as sweet a frame of contentment
as any one could wish for. they had put me to sleep in a chamber in
that same wing of the rearward buildings where slept elizabeth and
her father; thus, when i roused, the yellow sun was pouring in at my
lattice, rich with sweet country scents, and the april air was swaying
the white curtains, hung by dainty female hands across the diamond
panes, with youth and sweetness in every breath. i lay and basked in
it, and lazily wondered what all this changing fortune might mean.
where had i got to? who was i? i turned about and stared upon the
smooth white walls of the little room, patterned and tinseled with the
dancing sunshine from outside, then gazed at the great carved columns
of my four-post bedstead, then to the head, where, in a wide wooden
field, were blazoned old faulkener's arms and cognizance. i turned to
all the chairs, dusted so clean and set back true and straight, to the
ewer and the basin, full of limpid water from the well that caught the
morning shine and threw a dancing constellation of speckled light upon
the ceiling; i wondered even at the bare floor, scrubbed until there
was no spot upon it, and the snowy furniture of my couch and those
downy pillows upon which i presently sank back in luxurious indolence.

was i indeed that rude, rough captain of a grizzled cohort, with sinews
of steel and frame impervious to the soft touch of pleasure, who only
yesterday had burst through all the glittering phalanxes of france,
and cut a way with that arm that lay supine upon the coverlet right
down through the thickets of their spears to where the white fleur de
lys flashed in their midmost shelter? could i be that same wanderer
who, down the devious ways of chance, had tried a thousand ventures,
and slept in palaces and ditches, and drank from the same cup with
kings and the same trough with outlaws? i laughed and stretched, and
presently gave over speculating, and rose.

i washed and dressed, and went to the lattice, and looked forth. it
was as sweet a morning as you could wish for. the tepid sunshine
spread over everything, fleecy clouds were floating overhead upon the
softest of winds, the sweet new-varnished leaves were glittering in the
dew upon every bush, the small birds singing far and near, the kine
lowing as they went to grass, the distant cock crowed proudly from his
vantage-point among the straw, and everything seemed fair, fresh, and
happy in that budding season.

i had not been luxuriating in that sweet leisure many minutes when by
below came mistress bess, with cheeks like roses, and kerchief whiter
than snow, and brown unstranded hair that lifted on the breeze--a very
fair vision indeed. that maid tripped across the grass and down the
cobblestones, rattling the shiny milk-pan she was carrying until she
caught a sight of me, and stopped below my window. then, saucy, she
began: "how looks the world from there, sir? a little too young and
chilly for your tenderness? get back abed, it will presently be june,
and then, no doubt, more nicely suited to your valor's mind."

"nay, but lady," i explained, "i was enjoying the morning air, and just
coming to seek you"

"that were a thousand pities," she laughed, "the sun has not yet been
up more than some poor hour or two and the world is not yet nicely
warmed; you might have a chill, and that were much to be deplored;
besides, a silken suit is rarely needed where work has to be done. back
to thy nest, sir 'prentice! back to thy nest, and i'll send old margery
to tuck thee snugly up!" and the young girl, laughing like a brook in
springtime, went on and left me there discomfited.

nevertheless, i went down and took the plain but wholesome breakfast
that they offered me, and afterward whiled away an hour or so upon the
bench in wondering silently what all this meant, where it was drifting
to, how it would end, whether it were, indeed, ending or beginning. and
then came round the girl again, and, railing me on my melancholy, took
me out to see the herds and fields, and was all the time so sweetly
insolent, after her nature, and yet so velvet soft, that i was fairly
glamoured by her.

this maid, with the quick woman tongue, that was so pointed, and could
at need hurt so much, and the blue, speaking eyes that were as tender
and straightforward as her speech was full of covert thorns, led me
out into the orchards. first she took me to where the milk was stored,
a roomy open shed, smelling of cool cleanliness, with white benches
down the sides and red-flagged floor, and great open pans of crimson
ware full of frothy milk. outside the low straw eaves the swallows were
chattering, while the emerald meadows, through the farther doorway,
glistened and gleamed in the bright spring sunshine. here we discovered
two country girls at work making curds and cheese and butter; ruddy,
buxom damsels with strong round arms bare to the shoulder, with
rattling clogs upon their feet, white gowns tucked up, and kerchiefs
on their heads. these curtsied as we entered, and rattled the pans
about, and sent the strong streams of warm new milk gushing from pail
to pan. and then presently, when i had watched a time their busy
labor, nothing would suit mistress faulkener but i should try! that
saucy, laughing girl would have it so! and, glancing at the delighted
milkmaids, dragged me to a churn, there bidding me roll a sleeve to the
elbow, and take the long handle thus, and thus, and "put my strength
into it," and show i could do something to earn a luncheon. and i,
ever strong and willing, did her bidding, and rolled back my silk and
lawn, and bared the thews that had made me dreadful and victorious in
a thousand combats, and seized that white straight rod. but, hoth!
'twas not my trade, i had more strength than art, and the first stroke
that i made upon the curdling stuff within the white fluid leaped in
a glittering fountain to the roof above and drenched the screaming
maidens; the second stroke from my stalwart shoulders started two iron
hoops binding the strong ash ribs of that churn and made it swirl upon
the tiles, while at the third mighty fall the rammer was shivered to
the grasp, and the milk escaped and went in twenty meandering rivulets
across the floor! at this uprose those fair confederates and drove me
forth with boisterous anger, saying i had wasted more value in good
milk than most likely all my life so far had earned.

while they put right my amiss i sat upon a mossy wall and wiped dry my
hose and doublet. nor was there long to sit before out came my comely
hostess with forgiveness in her smiling eyes. "did i now see," she
queried, "how presumptuous it was to meddle with such things as were
beyond one's capacity?"

to which i answered that i truly saw. "and did i crave
forgiveness--would i make amends?" and to that i said she had but to
try me in some venture where my rough, unruly strength might tell,
and she should see. so peace was made between us, and on we went again
to note how the crimson buds were setting on the sunny, red garden
walls; to explore her sloping orchards, and count the frolic lambs that
clustered round the distant folds.

it was her kingdom, and here her knowledge bettered mine. this she soon
found out; and when i showed at fault in the stratagems of husbandry,
or tripped in politics of herds or flocks, she would glance at me
through her half-shut lids, and demurely ask:

"are you of good learning, friend?"

and to that i answered that "i had so much as might be picked up in a
reasonably long life--not scholarly or well polished, but sufficient
and readily accessible."

"i am glad of it," she said; "then you can tell the difference between
a codling and a pippin?"

"nay, i fear i cannot."

"oh! nor why one hen will lay white eggs and another brown?"

"sweet maid, my wonder never went as far as that!"

"i do greatly doubt you and your wonder! what would you do if butter
would not come upon the churn milk?"

"faith! i would leave it as not worth asking for--a poor, white,
laggard stuff no man should meddle with."

"heigho! and what is rosemary good for, and what rue?"

"by heaven, i do not know."

"how soon mayst wean a february lamb, and what wouldst thou wean it on?"

"hoth! i cannot tell!"

"nor when to cut meadow grass or make ketchup? nor how to cure
bee-stings or where to look for saffron? nor when to plant green
barley or pull rushes for winter candles?"

"not one of these; but if you would show me, such a tutor such a pupil
never would have had"

whereon the lady burst out laughing. "oh," she said, "you are shallow
and ignorant past all conception and precedent. why, the rosiest urchin
that ever went afield upon a plow-horse has better stock of learning!
in faith, i shall have to put you to school at the very beginning!"

i let the fair maid mock, for her gentle raillery was all upon her
lips, and in her eyes was dawning a light it moved me much to see.
we wandered away through pleasant copses, where the yellow catkins
and the red were out upon the hazels, and late ivory blackthorn buds,
like webs of pearls, were overhung upon those ebony-fingered bushes,
and fair pale primroses shone in starry carpets under the fresh green
canopy of the new-tented woods. and my fair bess knew where the mavis
built; and when i began to speak warm, and close into her ear, she
would turn away her head and laugh, and, to change the matter, play
traitor to the little birds and point their mossy home, and make me
stoop and peer under the leaves, and in pretty excitement--but was it
all absent-mindedly?--would lay a hand upon my own and be cheek to
cheek with me for a moment, and then, with country pleasure, take the
sapphire shells of future woodland singers in her rosy palm, and count
and con them, and post me in the lore of spots and specks and hues and
colors, and all the fair, incomprehensible alchemy of nature--then put
those tender things back, and lead on again to more.

pleasant is the sunshine in such circumstances! fair elizabeth knew
all the flowers by name. she knew where the gorgeous celandine, like
bright-blazoned heralds of the spring, was flashing down by the
stream that ran sparkling through the woods; the underglow upon the
frail anemone was not fairer than her english skin, as she did bind
a bunch into her bosom-knot. she could tell the reasons of affinity
between cuckoo-pint and cuckoo, and how it was that orchid-leaves
came spotted, and the virtue of the blue-eyed pimpernels, and why the
gently rasping tongues of the great meadow kine forswore the nodding
clumps of buttercup. and she liked cowslips and made me pick them--ah!
swarthy, strong, and sad-eyed me--me, with the wild alarums of battle
still ringing in the ambient country air--me, to whose eyes the fleecy
clouds, even as she babbled, were full of pictures of purple ambition,
of red mêlée, of the sweeping yellow war-dust that canopies contending
hosts--me, who heard on every sigh of the valley wind the shouting
of princes and paladins, the fierce deep cry of captains and the
struggling cheer that breaks from swinging ranks fast locked in deadly
conflict as the foemen give.

but nothing she knew of that, and would lead from cowslip-banks back to
coppice, and from coppice-path to orchard, and there mayhap, in the eye
of the sun, secure from interruption we would sit--she meetly throned
upon the great stem of a fallen apple-tree, whose rind was tapestried
betimes for that dear country sovereign by green moss and tissued gold
and silver lichens, and overhead the leaves, and at her feet the velvet
cushions of the turf, and me a solitary courtier there.

a very pleasant wooing--and if you call me fickle, why should i argue
it? think of the vast years that lapsed between my lovings; think how
solitary was the lovely, loveless world i was born into anew each time;
think how i longed to light it with the comradeship that shines in dear
eyes and hearts, how i thirsted to prejudice some sweet stranger to my
favor against all others, and claim again kinship of passion for a
moment with one, at least, of those dear, fickle, mocking shadows that
glanced through this fitful dream of mine!

besides, i was young--only some trivial fifteen hundred years or so had
gone by since they first swaddled me and dried my mother's tears--my
limbs were full and round, my blood beat thick and fast, youth and
soldier spirit shone in my undimmed eyes; not a strand of silver
glanced in that beard i peaked so carefully; and if my mind was full
of ancient fancies--ah! crowded with the dust and glitter of bygone
ages fuller than yonder old fellow's strange museum--why, my heart was
fresh. jove! i think it was as young as it had ever been; and that
maid was fair and rosy, and kind and tender. all in the glow of her
hat-brim her face shone like the ripe side of a peach; her smooth hands
hung down convenient to my touch, and her head, crowned with its sweet
crown of sunlit hair, was ever bent indulgent to catch my courtier
whispers. what? i argued, shall the river play with no more blossoms
because last year its envious fingers shook some petals down into its
depth? must the lonely hill forever frown in solitude and put by the
white mist's clinging arms, because, forsooth, some other earlier cloud
once harbored on its rugged bosom? 'twas miserly and monstrous, said my
youthfulness. so, nothing forgetting and nothing diminishing of those
memories that i had, i plunged into the new.

and that kind country girl played phyllis to my new-tried corydon as
prettily as any one could wish. i will not weary you with all we did or
said--the murmur of a summer brook is only good to go to sleep by--but
picture us immersed in solitary conclave, or wandering about in the
sweet green math of april meadows and finding the long days some six
hours all too short to say the nothing that we had to. suppose this
written, and i turn to other scenes which, perhaps, shall amuse you
better.

*       *       *       *       *

it by no means followed that because mistress elizabeth proved so
charming, her father was neglected. that old fellow had taken me for
his helper, had fed and harbored me, and something seemed owing him in
return. his huge and bulky engine was growing apace; indeed, it was
just upon the finishing. it was that my strong arms might second him
in some final parts he had brought me hither, and, being by nature
something of a smith, i helped him readily.

each day was spent in the sunshine and flowers, then, when evening came
and my fair playmate was gone to bed, i descended into old faulkener's
crypt, and, adding one more character to the many already played,
turned vulcan. hard and long we worked. had you looked upon us, you
would have seen, by the sullen furnace glow, two men, bare-armed and
leather-aproned, toiling in that black gallery until the sweat ran
trickling from them; forging, riveting, and hammering bars of iron,
plying the creaking bellows until the white heart of the fire-heap
was whiter than a glowworm-lamp; hurrying here and there about that
glistening mountain of cunning-fashioned steel that they were building;
filling their grimy den with flying dust and smoke and sparks; and thus
working on and on through the long midnight hours as though their very
lives depended on it, until the black curtain of the night outside
faded to pallid blue, and the chirrup of the homing bats coming to
sleep upon the rafters sounded pleasantly; and the furnace gave out,
and tired muscles flagged, and the night's work was over with the night!

evening after evening we toiled upon the iron giant that was to do such
wondrous things, old faulkener directing, and i supplying with my thews
and sinews the help he needed. then one day it was finished--finished
in every point and part--complete, gigantic, wonderful! i do confess
something of the old man's spirit entered into me when our work was
thus accomplished. i stood minute by minute before it overcome with
an awe and wonder inexplicable. and if the 'prentice felt like that,
the master was mad with expectation and delight. nothing now would
do but he must try it, and the next night we did so. we sent the
household early to their rest, and, as soon as it was dark, i, carrying
a spluttering torch, and faulkener the great cellar key, stole like
thieves across the cobbled courtyard to our workshop. the scholar's
fingers trembled till he scarce could fit the key into the wards, but
presently the door was opened, and we entered.

"no strangers trespass here to-night," the old man chuckled, while he
closed and double-locked the iron-studded door, and put the key into
his belt and the torch into a socket.

well, all agog with excitement, we lit the fires in the iron stomach
of that finished monster; we filled his gullet with kegs of water,
slewed his guiding-wheels round, laid heavy, sloping oaken planks for
his highness to leave his birthplace by, set back the litter, and,
lastly, turned the tap that brought the fire and water together, and
put the blood of that iron beast in motion. he came down from off the
pedestal for all the world like some black gorgon issuing from a den!
resplendent in weight and strength, he came sliding down from off the
platform of his cradle, and amid the crash of struts and stays, amid
flying splinters and the dust of transit, rolled out majestic into
the red furnace light; where, trembling in every fiber, and gently
swaying like a young giant feeling his strength for the first time,
with the strong breath within murmuring, and the great steel heart
pulsating audibly, our iron toy was born and launched, and came forth
magnificent, huge, overpowering--then, checked by its anchor-chains,
swerving round to face the farther end, and halted.

old faulkener was possessed with joy, dancing and capering round that
huge carcass as though he were a ten-years' urchin, his white beard all
astream, his elfin locks shaggy on his head, his black venerable robes
flapping like the wings of a great bat, his hands clasped fervidly as
he leaped and skipped with pleasure, and his lips moving rapidly as he
babbled incoherent adulation and love upon that firstling of his hopes.
even i, grave and thoughtful, was elated, and walked round and round
the wondrous thing, patting its iron sides as one might a charger's
just led from stall, while, half in wonder and half in pleasure,
catching a fraction of the old man's fancies. so far everything had
happened as we wished for, and faulkener, when he could get his breath,
burst out in wild rhapsodies of all his bantling should do, and i put
in a sentence here and there amid his pæans; and then he capped on a
hope, and i again a fancy, and so, nodding and laughing to each other,
we bandied words across that carcass for twenty minutes, and felt its
sinews, and marveled at its tractableness and grace.

and what was our sweet cyclops doing all that while? oh! we were young
in mechanics; and all the time we talked and capered the glowing fires
were working in that body, and presently the wheels began to ramble and
the bars to move; strange dull thunder came fitfully from under those
steel ribs, and quaint, unaccountable knockings sounded deep within;
the furnace glowed white and hot as angry jets of steam commenced to
spit from every weak point in the monster's harness. all this i noticed
and pointed out to the master; but he was stupid with gratification
in that moment of consummated labor, and now our vast machine began
to fret! it was impatient, i saw with a presage of coming evil, and
the great circles above began to grit their iron teeth and spin like
distaff wheels under a busy housewife's hand, the pistons were shooting
to and fro faster and ever faster, while that fifty tons of metal,
glowing hot, now began to yank hungrily upon its chains, and start
forward a foot and then come back, and sniff and snort and tremble,
and strain in every part, and thunder and pant as the hot life surged
stronger and stronger into its veins, until it was rocking like a skiff
at anchor, and bellowing like a bull in agony.

"by every saint, old andrew faulkener!" i shouted through the gathering
roar--"by every saint in paradise, have a care for this frightful beast
of thine!"

and i think he saw at last our danger, for the hundredth rhapsody died
unfinished upon his lips, and, dropping from the clouds at once, with
an anxious look, he scanned the now flying wonders of his offspring,
and then ran round and seized the handle which should have shut off
the red-hot vapor which was the breath and being of the puissant thing
he had conjured into being. twice and thrice he bore upon that handle,
then turned to me with a wild and frightened look. 'twas as hot as hot
could be, and could not move an inch! hardly had i read that in his
face, when with an angry plunge the engine started forward, and the
philosopher missed his footing, rolling over headlong to the ground
at my feet. and now our beast was mad with waiting, and stronger than
fifty elephants, and fiercer than the nettled lion. the chains that
held him upon either side were as thick as a man's arm, being fastened
to mighty staples in the forge. our swaddling came back two yards upon
those chains--then started forward, and was brought up all on a sudden
with such a jerk as made the ground tremble, and filled us with a
sickly dread. back came our splendid plaything again in no good mood,
and then forward once more, putting his mighty shoulders against his
bonds until the great steel chains stretched and groaned beneath the
strain, and andrew faulkener yelled in fear. the third time the monster
did this the staples gave, and all the forge fell into one dusty
smoking ruin, while the great engine twirled up those heavy chains upon
its thundering axles, and, laughing in savage joyfulness, recognized
the fatal fact that it was free!

then began a wild scene of chaos which brings the dampness of fear and
exertion on my forehead even to remember. what mattered chains or bars
or fetters to that splendid life that we could hear humming there under
those iron ribs?--to that unruly devil-heart which knew its strength,
and thundered in proud tumultuous rhythm to the consciousness? the
wonderful new titan was born, and there in his own den, in the black
cradle of his nativity, would brook no master--he was born for strength
and might, and, hoth! they were running hot within him, and we could
but cower in the shadows waiting and watching.

and now that hideous monster, being free to do what he listed, set
off for the far end of the stony cellar, and, like a great black ship
floundering in a chopping sea, went plunging and reeling over the
uneven floor. we held our breath. what would he do when he reached
the end? and in a minute he was there, and through the gloom we heard
him crash into the rocky walls and recoil; then, with a scream like
an angry devil-baby, charge the native masonry again and again. but
faulkener's wretched cunning had put the guiding-wheels on pivots, and
now they slewed, and here he was coming down the walls toward us.

we did not stop or wait to parley. we ran and dodged behind the
pillars, whence we heard him thud into the broken forge--ay, through
the reek and cloudy steam we caught the sound of that fifty tons of
metal clambering over the fallen masonry, all the time screeching in
his anger like a peevish fury at being so thwarted; then back we dodged
again, and the huge thing went lumbering by us full of a horrid giant
life no valor availed against, no mortal hands could shackle.

the more he beat about the bounds of that narrow infernal kingdom, the
less our cyclops seemed to like it. his rage mounted at each turn he
made and found his prison-cell so narrow, and every rebuff swelled his
budding choler. therefore, seeing how hopeless it was to strive to tame
him in this present mood, i waited till cyclops was exploring at the
bottom of the hall; then, plunging through the dusty turmoil, found
old faulkener. that gray inventor was reeling like a drunken man, and
witless with terror.

"the key--the key!" i shouted in his ear. "to the door! we can do
no good here. let your infernal beast burn out some of his accursed
spleen--then we'll make a shift to tame him. but 'tis no good now! hear
how he thunders! and--see--he is coming back again!"

"ah, the door, good friend, the door!" gasped faulkener; and, clinging
to my arm, hotly pursued by the monster behind--whose red-hot madness
now seemed tinged with cruel purpose--we fled down the long black
cavern to the iron-studded postern. there was not a second to spare:
the old man plunged his trembling hands into his belt and felt all
round it, then turned to me with a horrid stare in his eyes and a
sickly smile upon his thin white lips--the key was gone!

i dragged that old man back just as the great engine--ramping
hot--lurched down and cut a long smoking groove half a foot deep from
the rocky wall whereby we had been standing, then, disappointed of
us, went howling on into the blackness. and now there was nothing to
do but to stay and fight it out, no exit for us, and none for our
sweet bantling, and he seemed to know it! round and round he drove us
through the flickering gloom and shadows of that dismal cockpit, till
the gushing sweat ran from us, and our choking breath came short and
panting through our parching throats. oh! it was a sight to see that
shrieking monster, spurting steam at every joint and howling like a
pack of winter wolves, come careering through the darkness at us, with
every plate of his mighty harness quivering with the force within, and
all his thundering vitals glowing white and spawning golden trails of
molten embers as he lurched along. down i would see him come, perhaps,
hunting something in savage mood, and as i dodged behind a pillar
and looked, out of the vortex of the shadows would leap old andrew
faulkener, as a leveret leaps from the ferns under a lurcher's nose,
and, with ashy wild face, and flying wizard locks, and ragged sorrel
cloak flapping in shreds behind him, the master would flash in frenzied
fear across the glow that shimmered from the heart of his young titan,
and then be swallowed up again by the next friendly blackness, and i
scarce dare breathe as, with a hideous parody of vindictive cunning,
that great thing would swirl and swerve, and be after him again!

it was a wild, wonderful game, and the longer it went the hotter it
grew. closer, denser, and blacker grew the gloom of that place, until
at length you could not see an arm's-stretch ahead of you in the
sulphurous reek--a hot, steamy pall of dismal vapor, through which
glimmered redly, now and then, the ashes of the overturned furnace
place, and the rosin-dripping splutter of the feeble torch which we
had put into the socket by the door. ah! that was all we had to light
us as we crawled and leaped and dodged before the vengeful fury of
that screaming harpy of ours--all but his own red copper glow that
flamed now here, now there, on the black horizon of our den. darker and
still darker and hotter became the air, until at last--in half an hour
perhaps--the torch and the furnace ashes were sickly stars, too pallid
to light our merriment to any purpose, and even the glow of faulkener's
great invention was a red-hot haze, only illumining the seething dust
and smoke a yard or two about it, and everywhere else reigned black,
choking, stygian, infernal darkness.

a blank midnight void hung about the arena where we danced to that
great being--sprung like a black minerva from my master's over-fertile
brain. yet, jove! 'twas midnight dark, but there was no midnight
stillness in it. the very air seemed palpitating to the thunderous
beat of that beast's mighty life--every hollow cavern-niche in our
rocky walls bellowed into our startled ears a hideous mockery of his
screeching; while the ceaseless roar of his cruel stride rattled down
the ragged juts of our stony roof like dislocated thunder. and in
that darkness and ear-splitting din we dodged and dipped and scuttled
like two cornered rats. i have been brave--by this time i hope you
know it--but what was mortal strength or valor against the strength
and recklessness of that iron god? no, he had the upper hand, and
screamed for blood like the devil that he was, pressing us with such
fury that my very soul seemed oozing through my sweating skin. as for
dignity--gods! i had none! at one moment i and faulkener would be
struggling for a narrow passage like two hoggets in a meadow gate; then
i was anon crawling on hands and satin knees through pools half a foot
deep with filthy furnace-water, or straddling greasy heaps of brash
and ashes with the beast close behind to fire my flagging spirits,
spurting flame and scalding steam, and crunching with his ponderous
weight through the iron litter of the den as though it were an august
stubble.

and this was not all. being so dark, as i have said, presently that
iron monster, inspirited with the soul of a fury, found it more and
more difficult to follow us, and went reeling and bellowing through the
steamy blackness ever more at random. thereon he stopped a spell and
seemed to listen, and, though we could only tell his whereabouts by
the great fiery nebulæ of his glowing sides, we could plainly hear his
thousand steel teeth champing, and the gush of the boiling force flying
within him. we held our breath, and then we heard something change in
the machinery--some pin or rivet fail--and the next minute faulkener's
baby was off again with a scream like a lost spirit and possessed of a
cursed, brand-new idea. i have said the chains wherewith he had been
held to the forge were fastened to great revolving bars upon his side.
when he burst free he had torn these from the solid masonry and wound
them up upon the spinning axles, whereto by some misguided cunning
faulkener had welded them. and now that devil was ramping round to find
us in the void, and had unwound those hideous flails, and with infernal
patience was beating down one wall and up the other. oh! it was sickly
to hear the screech of those steel whips sweeping unseen through the
startled air, to hear them thud upon the trembling ground and cut deep
furrows in it at every savage lash--now here, now there, flogging the
frightened shadows and scourging the trembling rocks, and whistling
overhead like a thousand winged snakes--and all for us!--while that
great babe of my master's hunted slowly round about our narrow prison,
and thundered and howled and rattled like a tempest in a mountain pass,
and, as though he were some great monster in a deep sea cave, shot out
and drew in those humming tentacles, and tried each nook and corner,
and squirted steam and fire into every crevice, and plied his cruel
whips madly about in that darkness till 'twas all like pandemonium.

well, i will say no more, or you may think i wrap sober fact in that
mantle of fancy which the gods have lent me. we had dodged and ducked
at this game for many minutes when faulkener's mind gave way! i chanced
upon him in the middle space, laughing and screaming and taking off his
cloak and vest. he saw me stalk from the shadows, and, with a frightful
grin and caper, shouted that he knew what was the matter--"his pretty
firstling needed a bloody sacrifice, and who could provide it better
than himself?" just then the engine turned and came looming through the
mist toward us, and the old enthusiast made ready to cast himself under
those mighty wheels.

"come back!" i shouted, "come back!" but faulkener yelled: "touch me at
your peril, the sweet one must not be balked!" and made toward it.

i seized him by the arm and dragged him to one side, whereat, without
further parley, like a furious wild cat, he turned, and in a twinkling
had me by the throat, with those old talons of his deep buried in my
gullet, and his long, lean legs twirled round mine like thongs of
leather, and his mad eyes flashing, his white face lit up with maniac
passion; and so we heaved and struggled, then down upon our knees, and
over and over upon the floor, the old man striving all he knew to kill
me; while i, for my part, heaved and wrenched--all my splendid strength
cramped up in the wild grip of that sinewy old recluse--and over us,
as we fought upon the earth, was glimmering in a minute the red-copper
glow, the towering form, and the cruel, shrieking flails of that
exulting demon we had invented!

we rolled and plunged in the dust, just where that circle of red light
fell on it, while guttural sobs and sighs came from us, as, forgetful
of all else, now one was on top, in that ruddy arena, and then the
other. the veins were big upon my forehead; i felt faint and sick; i
could not loosen faulkener's iron fingers, deep bedded in my neck, and
did not care; and that grim old fellow had no desire now but to watch
me die. i saw the glowing haze wherein we fought, and dimly understood
it. i heard, faintly and more faintly, the rattle of the chains, and
the thunderous, black laughter of our plaything, and then, just as
that glowing fury seemed drawing itself together for one final effort
which should crush us both from all form and shape, that very effort
put something out of gear--the tangled wheels fell into dead-lock all
on a sudden, the heavy chains jerked wildly in their swing and twisted
together, the mighty rods and pistons went all asplay like a handful of
broken straws, the great beast trembled and reeled and shook, and then
split open from end to end, and, with a thunderous roar that shook our
cellar to its deepest foundations, amid a wild gust of flame and steam,
blew up!

i rose unhurt from the dust and ashes, and unwinding faulkener's
lifeless limbs from about me, found a hammer by the forge, and,
scrambling over the now pulseless remnants of the giant, burst open the
door, and a few minutes later laid the great inventor's body down upon
a bench in the peaceful moonlit courtyard.

chapter xxiii

the episodes i now relate are so strange, so nearly impossible, that
i hesitate to set them down lest you should call me untruthful and a
_jongleur_; nevertheless, they are told as they occurred, and you must
believe them as you may.

my quaint recluse had not been slain that night we tried his infernal
engine, but had lain in a long swoon after i carried him from amid the
wreck and débris of his den out into the moonlight. that swoon, indeed,
lasted for a whole day and night; and elizabeth wrung her white hands
over her father's seeming lifeless body, while emanuel picked his
yellow teeth reflectively with his dagger-point at the couch-foot, and
dame margery spent all her art in unguents and salves upon the luckless
inventor ere he showed signs of returning life.

at last, however, he revived, and made a long, slow recovery of many
days under the gentle ministering of his women. and while he throve
hour by hour in the spring sunshine on the bench of his porch, i wooed
his daughter in wayward, dissatisfied kind, and laughed scornfully at
the black spaniard's jealous scowls, and won the mellow heart of the
old dame by my gallantness and courtesy. but it was child's play. i
longed again to feel the hot pulse of keen emotions throbbing in my
veins, to struggle with some strong tide of hot adventure, and so at
last i had made up my mind to leave my good host and hostess at an
early season, and, turning soldier again, espouse the first quarrel
which chance threw in my way.

then one day it happened--a strange day indeed to me--old master andrew
faulkener had grown weary of his cranks and fan-wheels, and had gone
for solace to his dusty tomes and classics. exploring amid them, in an
eventful moment he had taken down a missal penned by some old saxon
monk, and turned to a passage he must have known well, since it was
marked and thumbed. and while the ancient scholar read and mumbled over
that quaint black letter with its gorgeous gold and crimson uncials,
i, who chanced to stand a little way apart, saw the wan blood mount
in a thin pink glow to the enthusiast's cheeks, and in that flush
recognized that he was warm upon another quest. he mumbled and muttered
to himself, and while he sauntered up and down, or stopped now and then
to thumb and pore over that leathern volume, i caught, in disjointed
fragments, some pieces of his thoughts. "ha! ha! a most likely find
indeed, a splendid treasure-house of trophies--and to think that no
one but old ambrose and i wot of it, ho! ho! what does he say? ‘and
in this place was destroyed a noble house, and the anger of the lord
fell on the pagan defenders, and they were slain one and all. ah! god
leveled their idolatrous dwelling-places and scattered their ashes to
the four winds of heaven, and with them were destroyed--the common
legend sayeth--all their hoards of brass and silver, all their accursed
images of bronze and gold, all their trinkets and fine raiment, so that
the vengeance of the lord was complete, and the heathen was utterly
wiped out.' good, very good, brother ambrose," muttered the old man
with chuckling pleasure. "and now, where did this thing happen? ‘this
house which harbored so much lewdness stood on the hillock by the road
a few miles from the river, and had all that land which now is holy
perquisite to the neighboring abbey.' good! good!--for certain 'tis the
very spot i thought of--a happy, happy chance that made me light upon
this passage--i who live so near the spot it speaks of--i who alone of
thousands can use it as the golden key to unlock such a sweet mine of
relics as that buried pagan home must be. oh! ambrose, i am grateful,"
and patting the musty monkish tome in childish pleasure, he replaced it
reverently upon its shelf.

then up and down he paced, the student's passion burning hot within
him, muttering as he went: "why not to-night? why not, why not? there
is no season better for such a work than soon, and i have my license,"
whereon he went to a peg on the wall and fumbled in the wallet of the
ragged cloak i had seen him wear the night we met. in a minute out came
a brand-new scroll of parchment, neatly rolled and folded, and stamped
with the royal seal. that scroll andrew faulkener undid, and, setting
his horn glasses on his nose, began to read the paper at arm's length
with inarticulate sounds of rapture. it seemed to delight him so much
that presently i sauntered over to share in the merriment, forgetting
i had thus far been unobserved; but when we came within two paces of
each other the scholar, perceiving me, with a cry of dismay stuffed
the crushed parchment hurriedly into his bosom as though he thought
himself about to be robbed of something precious by a sudden ambuscade.
however, in a minute he recognized the robber, and was reassured, yet
undecided still, and inch by inch the white roll came forth, while
the old man kept his eyes fixed on mine. what were his scripts and
scrolls to me? i smiled to note the store he set by them: there was
not one of those poor things could interest me more nearly than a last
year's leaf from the garden yonder--and yet, strange to say, that
white roll, creeping into light from under his rusty gaberdine, did
attract me somehow. long life and strange experience have wakened in
me senses dormant in other mortals, and i begin to be conscious of a
knowledge beyond common knowing, a sense behind other senses, which
grows with practice, and seems ambitious by and by to bridge the gulf
which separates tangible from unreal, and what is from what will be.
that growing perspicacity within me smelled something of weight about
faulkener's writing more than usual, and with my curiosity gently
roused, i queried:

"that seems a script of value, sir. is its interest particular or
public?"

"in some ways, good youth," faulkener answered hesitatingly, as he
unfolded the scroll so slowly as though he were jealous even of the
prying sunshine, "in some ways the interest of what this is the key to
is very general, and in other ways it is, at least for some time to
come, most private."

"enough!" i said, "and i am sorry to have questioned you; but your
pleasure in the tome over there suggested just now that this were some
general matter of curiosity--some dark passage in history whereon,
perhaps, two minds might shed more light than one. i ask indulgence for
intrusion."

"nay, but stop a minute! history, did you say? why, this is history;
this is the birthscript of a brand-new page in history; this is leave
to turn a leaf no other fingers have ever turned, to spell out in sweet
ashes and lovely fragments a whole chapter, perchance, of the bygone.
boy!" cried the old fellow, grasping my arm with his lean fingers, and
whispering in my ear as though he dreaded the grinning mummy of pharaoh
in the shadow might play eavesdropper, "can you keep a secret?"

"ay! fairly, when it does not interest me."

"why, then--there, take that and read it," and faulkener thrust the
roll into my hands, and cast himself into an attitude, and crossed
his arms upon his chest, and stared at me from under his shaggy
eyebrows as if he fancied to see fear and wonder and delight fly over
my countenance while my eyes devoured that precious deed of his. what
was there so wonderful in it? the thing was sealed and tasseled, the
ink and paper were new, the parchment white; it was, in fact, the
very vellum faulkener had been on his way to beg at court when we two
met--a wonderful chance, as you shall presently see, an extraordinary
hap indeed that brought me to his side out of the great wastes of time
at the very instant when that ancient scholar was on the road to ask
that license. but i did not know while i read how nearly the parchment
touched me. it looked just an ordinary missive from high authority to
humble petitioner, profuse and verbose, signed and counter-signed, and,
amid a wilderness of words, just a grain of sense that i construed as
giving the bearer leave to seek for treasure on certain lands therein
mentioned, and adopt the same to his proper pleasure without tax or
drawback.

"this may be a golden key, sir," was my response, as the thing was
handed back, "but it is difficult to learn anything of the door it
opens by looking on it."

"yet, nevertheless, young man, it is a golden key, and you shall see
me use it, for if, as yonder broken engine hints, the fates will that
i may not pry into the misty future, yet with their leave, with the
help of this and you, will i peep into the even more shadowy past. were
you ever at the opening of an ancient crypt--a stony hiding-place, for
instance, where dead men's bones lay all about mid dim gems and the
rusty iron playthings of love and war?"

"i do recall one such an episode."

"and did it not affect you greatly?"

"greatly indeed."

"ay, boy, and this that i will show you shall affect you more--we two
will turn a leaf which shall read as clear to you as though you had
been at the writing of it a thousand years before. it is a grassy
hillock, and you shall lift that sod with me, and, if this thing is as
i think it is, oh! you shall start at what you find, and coward ague
shall unstring your soldier legs, you shall be dumb with wonder, and
ply your mattock with damp, fearful awe beaded on your forehead, and
starting eyes fixed fast in horrid pleasure on what we will unearth.
ay, if you have a spark of generous comprehension, if one drop of the
milk of kindness still bides within you, you shall people this place
we go to find with such teeming, sprightly fancies, such moving
mockeries of frail human kind new risen from their ashes at your feet,
that you shall wring your hands out of pure rue for them that were,
and pluck your beard in dumb chagrin, and beat upon your heart, even
to watch all that which once was ruddy valor and hot love, and white
beauty go adrifting so upon the dusty evening wind! you will come with
me?"

"old man!" i said, pacing up and down with folded arms and bent head,
"'twas upon my tongue to say i would not--i had a fair tryst to keep
this evening, and something that i have seen of late makes such
ventures as you have planned doubly distasteful to me; 'twas in my
mind to laugh and shake my head--but, gods! you have stirred a pulse
within me that rouses me with resistless wonder; your words tell on me
strangely--there is something in that you say which echoes through my
heart like the footfall of a storm upon the hollow earth, and i can do
nothing but listen and acquiesce. i will come!"

"good youth, good youth, i knew you would; and, that our hopes may not
suffer by delay, let us prepare at once. get you mattock, spade, and
pick, with whatever other tools your strength shall need, and i will
feed and have my pretty palfrey saddled, and con yon crabbed passage
over once again. so we will be ready; and at nightfall, under the
yellow stars, will start upon a venture that you shall think on for
many a day."

i bent my head, and we did as faulkener suggested. but a strange
unrest possessed me. when spade and mattock were hidden where we could
take them up in secret (for we did not wish our enterprise too widely
known), the time hung wondrously heavy on hand. all the tedious hours
before sunset i was oppressed with an anxiety quaint and inexplicable;
half wishing by turns i had not promised to join the mad old fellow in
his moonlight quest, and then laughing my scruples down and becoming
as restless for the start as before i had been reluctant. as for the
scholar himself, the very shirt of dejanira possessed him, and his
impatience shone behind his yellow wrinkled face like a candle inside
a horn lantern. somehow the hours wore through, however, and when the
evening was come, we set forth, faulkener pale and eloquently raving
from astride of that mean palfrey whose sumpter pad was loaded with our
tools on one side, and on the other a monster sack wherein to bring
back all the treasure we were to rifle, and i on foot leading that
gentle beast, and thoughtful, past proportion or reason.

at first we pushed on at a brisk pace by familiar roads, but after a
time our path lay more to the eastward, the scholar said, and once
off the broad white track leading to the nearest town the road grew
narrower and more narrow. on we went in silence, mile after mile; by
rutty lanes where twittering bats flitted up and down the black arcades
of overhanging bush and brier; by rushy flats where the water stood wan
and dim in the uncertain light; now brushing by the heavy, dew-laden
branches of a woodman's path through deep thickets of oak and beech,
and then following a winding sheep-track over ling and gorse. so somber
was that way, and so few the signs of life, i wondered how the scholar
kept even the direction; but he was a better pilot than he seemed, and,
while he ranted silently upon the sky and waved his hands in ghostly
rhythm to his unspoken thoughts, i found from a chance word or two he
was in some kind watching the stars, and leading us forward by their
dim light toward that goal whereof he had got knowledge from his musty
tomes. on we went through the still starry night, pacing along from
black shadows to black shadows, and moonlight to silver moonlight,
until it must have been within an hour or two of day-breaking, for
under the purple pall of sky there was a long stream of pale light in
the east. it was about that time, and the night shadows were strong
and ebony, and the cold breath and deep hush of a coming morning hung
over everything when faulkener first began to hesitate, and presently
confessed that that which he sought for should be somewhere here, but
in the glimmer of the starlight he was uncertain whether it lay to
right or left. we halted, and, mounting on a hillock, peered all about
us, but to little purpose, fur the somber night hid everything, the
massed forest trees rose tier upon tier on every hand, like mountain
ranges running on indefinite into the gloomy passes of the clouds, and
the chance gleams of moonlight, lying white and still upon the dew-damp
meadows, were so like great misty lakes and rivers, it were difficult
to say whether they were such or no.

so back we scrambled once more, and unhitched our patient beast from
the hazel whereto we had tied him, and plunged on again by dingle and
sandy road, and rough woodland path, until we were hopelessly mazed,
and there seemed nothing for it but to wait till daylight or go empty
back. yet, reluctant to do either, we held to it a little, hoping some
chance might favor us. 'twas past midnight--not a crow of distant cock
or yelp of village cur broke the dead stillness, and we were plodding
down a turfy road, when on a sudden our patient steed threw forward
his ears and came to a dead stop, and, almost the same minute, the
gray clad figure of a countryman in long cape and hood, a wide slouch
hat upon his head, and a tall staff in his hand, came out from the
depth a hundred yards ahead of us, and with slow, measured gait and
bent face walked down toward us. old faulkener was overjoyed. here was
one who knew the country, and would show us his precious hillock;
and he shouted to that stranger, and tugged his palfrey's rein. but
that observant beast was strangely reluctant; he went on a pace, then
stopped and backed and pawed the silent ground, throwing his prick ears
forward, whinnying, and staring at that silent coming stranger, with
strange disquiet in every movement. and i--i sympathized with that dumb
brute; and, as the countryman came near, somehow my blood ran cold and
colder; my tongue, that was awag to ask the way, stuck helpless to my
teeth; a foolish chill beset my limbs; and, by the time we met, i had
only wit enough left to stare, speechless, at that gray form, in silent
expectation. but the old philosopher did not feel these tremors. he was
delighted at our good luck, and, fumbling in his wallet, pulled out a
small silver piece which he tendered to the man, explaining at the same
time our need and asking him to guide us.

the stranger took the coin in silence, and, keeping his face hidden in
the shadow of his hat, said the mound was near, "he knew it well, he
had bided by it long," and he would willingly show us where it lay.
back we went by copse and heather, back for half a mile, then turned
to the right, and in a few minutes more came out of the brushwood into
the starlight, and there at our very feet the ground was swelling up in
gentle sweep to the flat top of a little island-hill lost in the sea of
forest-land about it. it was the place we came for, and the scholar,
without another thought for us, joyfully pricked his steed to the rise,
and was soon out of sight round the shoulder of the ground.

but i! oh, what was that strange, dull hesitation that made my feet
heavy as lead upon that threshold? whence came those thronging,
formless fancies that crowded to my mind as i surveyed that
smoothly-rounded hillock, and all the fantastic shadows beyond it?
that spot was the same one i had wandered to when i walked lonely
from faulkener's house, and mere chance brought me to it anew at dead
midnight; and all the old thrills of indistinct remembrance i then had
felt were working in me again with redoubled force, moving my soul to
such unrest that i bent my head and hid my eyes, and strove long but
vainly to recall why or when i had last trodden that soil, as somewhere
and somehow i was certain that i had. thinking and thinking without
purpose, presently i looked up, and there, two paces away was still
that gray hedgeman leaning on his staff and regarding me from under
his country hat with calm, soulless attention. i had forgotten his
presence, and it was so strange to see him there, so rustic and so
stately, that i started back, and an unfamiliar chill beset me for an
instant. but it was only a moment, then, angry to have been surprised,
i turned haughtily upon him, and, with folded arms, in mockingness of
his own stern attitude, stared proudly into those black shadows where
should have been his face. jove! 'twas a stare that would not have
blanched for all the lightning in a cæsar's eye or wavered one moment
beneath the grim returning gaze of any tyrant that ever lived; and yet,
even as i looked into that void my soul turned to water, and my eyelids
quivered and bent and drooped, my arms fell loose and nerveless to my
side, and every power of free action forsook me.

that being took my perturbation with the same cold lack of wonder he
had shown throughout. he eyed me for a minute with his sleepy, stately
calm, and then he said: "you have been here before."

"yes," i answered, "but how or when only the great gods know"--and
though i noticed it not at the moment, yet since it has flashed upon me
as another link in a wondrous chain, that at that moment both i and
the gray countryman were using the long-forgotten british tongue!

"and would you know, would you recall?" he queried in his passionless
voice.

"ay, if it is within your power to stir my memory, stir it, in the
name of loud taranis, of old belenus, and all the other fiends i once
believed in!"

"well sworn, phœnician!" said the tall nocturnal wanderer, and without
another word grasped his staff and, signing me to follow, led round
the shoulder of the hillock to where, alone and solitary, we two were
stayed by a trickling rivulet that sprang from a grassy basin in the
slope, and went by a little rushy course winding down into the dusky
thickets beyond. at that pool my guide stopped suddenly, then, pointing
with stern finger still shrouded under the folds of his ample cloak:

"drink!" he cried. "drink and remember!"

i could no more have thwarted him than i could have torn that solid
mound from off its base, and down i went upon one knee, and took a
broken crock some shepherd had left behind, and filled it, and put it
to my lips and drank. then up i leaped with a wild yell of wonder and
astonishment, while right across the sullen midnight sky, it seemed,
there shot out in one broad living picture all the painted pageantry of
my roman life. i saw old roman britain rise before me, and the quaint
templed towns of a splendid epoch leap into shape from the tumbled
chaos of the evening clouds. i saw the crowded episodes that had
followed after the rewakening in the cave where my princess had laid
me; the faces of my jolly long-dead comrades seemed thronging round
about me; i heard the street cries of a roman-british city; i saw the
dust rise, and the glitter as the phalanges wheeled and turned upon the
castra before the porch where, a gay patrician gallant, i lounged in
gold and turquoise armor. i saw electra's ivory villa start into form
and substance out of the pale, filtering tudor moonlight, and the great
white bull, and the haughty lady, stately and tall, beckoning me up her
marble steps; and then i was with her, her petted youth, lying indolent
and happy, toying disdainfully with the imperial love she proffered
me, while we filled our rainbow shells from that bright fountain that
spurted in her inner court!

with a wild cry i dropped the shepherd's crock and started back. the
water i was sipping was the water of electra's courtyard fountain!
gods! there was none other like it. often we two had drunk of that
crystal torrent as it burst, full of those sweet earth-salts the romans
loved so well, from the bowels of the earth straight into her pearly
basins; the last time i had stooped to it was on that night of fiery
combat when electra's villa fell--and here i was sipping of it again,
so strangely and unexpectedly that i hid my eyes a space, scarce
knowing what might happen next. when i uncovered them the black dusty
clouds had swallowed the painted pageantry of my vision, the night-wind
blew chill round the grassy slope; the roman villa and fountain had
gone from the gray shadows where we stood--only the tinkle of the
falling water was left in the darkness, and in front of me still the
tall figure of that gray-clad countryman. only that countryman! hoth!
how can i describe the rush of keen wonder and fear which swept over me
when, looking at him again, i saw that he had turned back the flap of
his wide hat, and there, in the dead gray light, was staring at me--the
same stern, passionless face that had come to my shoulder in the reek
and heat of combat on this very spot thirteen hundred years before,
and, doing the bidding of the great unknown, had drawn me from those
fiery shambles only just in time?

i knew him then, on the instant, as no mortal, and glared, and glared
at him with every nerve at tension, and speechless tongue, too numb to
question, and while i stared like that with the strong emotion playing
on lip and eye--it was only a minute or so, though it seemed an epoch,
the face of that being was lit by a smile, sedate and impalpable.

then, turning to me with gentle superiority, he said: "you have
been long, phœnician! they told me you would come again, and i have
waited--waited for you here these few hundred years--waited until
i near tired of watching all your circling vagaries. here is the
place you came to-night to find--my errand ends! dig, wonder, and
reflect--this i was told to show you and to say!" and like the echo of
his own words, like the shadow of a cloud upon a rock, that strange
messenger of another life was drunk up by the darkness right in front
of my wondering eyes.

so swift and silent was his passage back into the outer vagueness that
for a minute i could not believe he had gone in truth, and held my
breath, and stared up and down, expecting he would fashion again out
of the draughty air, or speak above or below, once more, in that voice
every syllable of which fell clear on my soul, like water falling into
a well. but it was useless to listen and peer into the gloom. the shape
was gone beyond recall; and, while my mind still pondered over the
strangeness of it, keeping me spellbound at the brink of that enchanted
fountain, with bent head and folded arms, trying to guess how much of
this was fantasy, and how much fact, there rose a shout upon the still
night air, and, raising my eyes, there was faulkener's quaint black
image capering wildly on the dusky skyline, the while he brandished
aloft in one hand a spade, and in the other--looking quaintly like a
new-severed head dangling by the hair--the first sod he had cut of that
"treasure-heap" so dear and dreadful to me.

i went sullenly up to the recluse, full of such strange, conflicting
feelings as you may suppose, and found him eager and excited. he had
marked out a long furrow across the crest of the hill, "and this we
were to open and strike out right or left according as our venture
throve." jove! i stared for a time at that black trench as though it
were the narrow lip of hell, which presently should yawn and throw
up a grim, ghostly, warlike crew, worse than those who frightened
jason. and then i laughed in bitterness and perplexity, and tore off
my doublet and rolled my tunic-sleeves above my shoulder, and took a
spade, and at one strong heave plunged it deep into the tender bosom of
the swelling turf just over where the outskirts of the ancient roman
house had been, and wrenched it up. then in again, and then again,
while the mad philosopher capered in the twilight to watch my sinewy
strength so well applied, and the whistling bats swept curious round
us. i had not turned back a stitch of that light, peaty coverlet,
when down my spade sank through an inner crust, deep into something
soft and hollow-seeming; and the next minute faulkener, who also had
set to work, was into the same fine strata too. we laid it bare, and
there below us shone a floor of white dim ashes, mixed with earth, and
leaves, and roots.

"a torch! a torch!" yelled faulkener, and down he went upon his knees,
and, wild with exultation, wallowed in that powdery stuff, throwing it
out by hand and armfuls, till all his clothes were covered with it,
and his hoary beard was still more hoary, and his white face still
more white, and his mad twinkling eyes were still more lunatic, and
i helping him, full of crowding hopes and fears. and so we dug and
groveled and scraped, while the pale stars twinkled overhead, until
soon my master gave a shout, and looking quickly at him--jove! he was
hand in hand with a dead white hand that he had uncovered, and was
hauling at it in frantic eagerness, and scraping away the rubbish
above, and slipping and plunging and staggering in the gray dust, while
the beaded sweat shone on his forehead, and his white elf-locks were
all astray upon the night air; and then--gods!--it began to give, and
i held my breath--knowing all i knew--while the white stuff cracked
and heaved about that ghostly palm, and then it opened, and--first his
head, and then his shoulders, and then his stiff contorted limbs--my
master dragged out into the starshine, with one strong effort, a bulky
ancient warrior!

there, in the torchlight which faulkener held above him, slept that
kiln-dried soldier. he lay flat upon his back, and, while one knotted,
shriveled fist was stretched stiff in front in deathless anger, the
broken digits of his other hand were welded by red iron rust about the
red rusty hilt of a bladeless sword. and that soldier's soulless face
was set stiff and hard, while on his stern, shut lips and deep in his
eyeless sockets even now restless passion and quenchless hate seemed
smoldering. about that frail body still clung in melancholy tatters the
shreds and remnants of purple webs and golden tissue. on his shoulders,
sunk into his withered, lifeless flesh, were the moldy straps and
scales of harness and cuirass, and on his head what once had been,
though now it was more like winter wrack, a gay helmet and a horseman's
nodding crimson plume. it was a ghostly plaything to unearth like that
under the wavering starlight, and it was doubly dreadful to note how
deathlike was it while yet all the hot life-passion lay stamped forever
in unchanging fierceness on the hideous mask of dissolution. i turned
away as faulkener, gleefully shouting that he was a thousand years old
if he was a day, tore the russet trophies from him, and pushed him
down the hill; i turned away, grimly frowning, out into the black
starlight, with folded arms, for that contorted thing was jolly caius
martius, my merry byzantine captain of those mercenaries who stood it
out with me that last night of roman power in england! jolly caius
martius! often we two had set the british dogs a-yelping as we wandered
home from noisy midnight frolics down the moonlit temple streets; often
we two had driven the same boar to bay deep in his reedy stronghold;
often at banquet and at feast, when the roses lay deep below and the
strong warm breath of scented wine hung thick above, that curly black
head the mercian damsels liked so well had sunk happy and heavy on
my shoulder. jove! how the world had spun since then!--and there was
faulkener pushing him down the slope, and i could not raise a comrade
finger for merry caius, and could only stupidly remember, as the
sprawling head went trundling away into the brambles, how, in that long
ago, i had owed him half a silver talent and had never yet repaid it!

well, we fell to work again, and farther on, amid the passages where
these ancient men had fought and fallen in the rout, we found a limb,
and dug about it till we uncovered another strange, twisted hide of
what was once humanity--a stalwart shell this one, but faulkener
thought little on him because he wore no links or chains, and set
him rolling after the other with scant ceremony. the next we came to
seemed by gear and weapons a southern mercenary. he lay asprawl upon
his face, and my master levered him out and plucked him of his scanty
metal relics with no more compunction than if he were a pigeon. it was
grim, wild work, there under the leer of the yellow dawning, all in the
hush of the twilight, coming on those ghastly relics thus one by one,
and prising them out of their ashy shells, and turning them over, and
reading on each black mummy mask, that seemed to smile and grin with
dead ferocity under the flickering flambeau light, the countenance and
fashion of ancient comrade and ally. and ever and anon as i worked,
held to the labor by a strange fascination, the melancholy footfall of
the gusty wind came pacing round the hill, and with a frown and start i
would look over my shoulder, half fearing, half hoping it was my gray
countryman once more. so we toiled, and toiled, while the light waned,
and faulkener's treasure-heap was swelling. and the nearer we worked
to the center of that ample round of corridors and courts the thicker
came to light those old world fighters, and presently we got right
down to the tessellated paving of electra's lordly hall, and here we
found what it was which made all these ancient warriors so still and
lasting. it was that strange, mysterious fountain. that jet of pungent
taste and wondrous properties, when the walls fell in, had overflowed
its basins and percolated through the deep soft ashes lying thick about
these marble rooms and chambers, and, by the stony magic wherewith it
was charged, had lined and filled those ancient gentlemen it met with,
and thereafter, in long dark months of silence, had supplemented their
wasting tissues with its calcareous sediment, and kept them forever as
we found them--strange, horrible, exact, and real, with passion and
life stamped deep on every face, and strength and vigor in every limb,
although those faces wore only ashy masks, and those limbs no stouter
than the vellum on which i write.

under the crust of welded stone and ashes it was wonderful to see how
perfectly was everything preserved. we raised it in great flakes from
the stony flooring, and all the stain and litter of the fight lay under
it, as though they were not a dozen hours old; we chipped that scaly
covering from the walls, and there, fresh as the moment they were made,
gleamed up under our wavering torchlight all the gay mural paintings,
the smudges of battle, and the scars of axe and arrow. we lifted that
pale, stiff shroud from the inner chambers, and beneath lay shreds and
shells of furniture and gear; the half-baked loaves were in the oven;
the flesher's knife was on the block! round about the bounds of that
stately ruin we went, uncovering at every spadeful something mournful,
forgetting fatigue and time, as wonder after wonder rose to view; thus
we came at last to the mid court, where the great fight had been, and
peeled the thin turf from off it, far and near.

we had scarce begun to rake aside the ashes, when down to help us
came, out of the black parting clouds, strong gusts of cold morning
wind, blowing fitfully at first and chill, and sobbing overhead and
all about us, as though the gray air was full of spirits. it gathered
strength, and, wailing over the wide floor we had uncovered, in one
strong breath swept back the veil of ashes, and there--jove!--all amid
the juts of fallen masonry and stumps of beam and rafter, blackened in
that fire which seemed but yesterday, were high, protruding knees of
dead combatants, and stiff bent elbows, as thick as grass; and haggard,
wizened faces, all stamped with twenty fine degrees of terror; and
fierce clenched fists, and hands that still waved above them broken
hilt and blade. there they lay in heaps and rucks about that ancient
villa floor, just as they had died fighting amid the red choking ashes
of the blazing roof, all horribly lifelike and yet so grimly dead! old
faulkener yelled in sheer affright, and capered, and shook his fists
toward them, and tore his lean white locks 'tween dread and wonder; and
stiff my phrygian curls seemed on my head, and cold the sweat upon my
forehead.

and then, while we watched, a very wonderful thing happened, and,
dreadful and beautiful, those cinders began to glow. jutting beam and
rafter grew red and redder, pile and timber and cornice caught the
ambient blush, the crimson stain crept all across the hall, it burned
in mockery upon ruined wall and portico, and lit with an unearthly
radiance those parched, contorted faces that grinned and leered and
frowned, still in frantic struggle with their kind, all round us. was
i mad? was this some hideous last delusion which beset my aching mind
and horror-surfeited eyes? no! there was faulkener saw it too, and had
fallen on his knees and buried his fearful face behind his hands and
thrown his gaberdine cloak over his head to shut out that dreadful
sight. i drew my hand across my face and looked again: it was true,
too true--that charred and ancient villa was all alight once more;
wherever fire had been, at every point and crevice, there the ambient
glow was smoldering with a flameless brightness. it underlay the silver
ashes with a hot golden shine; it gilded all the fallen metal statues
of gods and goddesses until they seemed to shimmer beneath its touch;
it shone near by under the walls and far out upon the steps--it was so
real, so terribly like what it had been here a thousand years before,
that i half bent to take a weapon, in the delusion of that brilliant
fantasy, a husky cry of encouragement to those stark, ancient warriors
half framed itself upon my lips--and then, how exactly i know not, but
somehow a slight insequence fleshed upon me, and in another minute i
had spun angrily round upon my heel--and there i saw, right behind us,
calm, benignant, crimson, the great may sun was topping the eastern
oak-trees.

chapter xxiv

after that eventful episode just detailed, life ran smooth and
uneventful for a time in the old manor-house. i had had enough to think
of for many a day, and was inert and listless somehow. war, that had
seemed so bright, had lost its color to me. honor! and renown! why, the
green grass in the fields were not more fleeting, i began to think;
and what use was it striving after conquests which another age undid,
or attempting brave adventures whereof a later time recognized neither
cause nor purpose? i was in a doleful mood, as you will see, and lay
about on faulkener's sunny, red-brick terraces for days together,
reflecting in this idle fashion, or pressed my suit upon his daughter
when other pastimes failed.

now, this latter was a dangerous sport for one like me, and one whose
fair opponent at the game had such a fine untaught instinct for it
as mistress bess possessed. i began to speak soft things unto that
lady's ear, as you may remember, like many another, for lack of better
occupation, and because it seemed so discourteous to be indifferent to
the sweet enticement of my friend, and then i took the gentle malady
from her, and, growing worse than she had been, how could she do aught
but sympathize? and so between us we eked the matter on in ample
leisure, until that which was a pretty jest became at last very serious
and sober earnest.

it was a strange wooing. i still worked in the forge, riveting,
hammering, and piecing together the fragments of the scholar's
shattered dream, and down the damsel would come at times into the
grimy den and sit upon the forge-corner in her dainty country smock,
twirling her ribboned points and laughing at me and my toil, as fresh
and dainty among all that gloomy black litter round about as a ray
of spring sunshine. i was so solitary and glum, how could i fail to
be pleasured in that dear presence? and one time i would hammer her
a gleaming buckle or wristlet out of a nob of ancient silver, and it
was sweet to see that country damsel's eagerness as, with flushed face
and sparkling eyes, she bent over and watched the pretty toy shine
and glitter and take form and shape under my cunning hammer. or then
again, perhaps, another day i would tell her, as though it were only
hearsay, some wondrous old story of the ancient time, so full of light
and color and love as i could fill it, and that dear auditor would
drink in every syllable with thirsty ears, and laugh and weep and fear
and tremble just as i willed, the while i pointed my periods with my
anvil irons, and danced my visionary puppets against the black shadows
of that nether hall. hoth! a good listener is a sweet solace to him
whose heart is full! those narratives did so engross us that often the
forge went cold, and bar and rivet slumbered into blackness, while i
stalked up and down that dingy cavern peopling it with such glowing
forms and fancies as kept that dear untutored damsel spellbound; often
the evening fell upon us so, and we had at last to steal shamefacedly
across the courtyard to where the warm glow behind the lattices told us
supper and the others waited.

there was small difference in these days. i hammered cheerful and i
hammered dull, i hammered hopeful and i hammered melancholy, i hammered
in tune to the merry prattle of that girl, and i hammered sad and
solitary. and ever as i forged and welded by myself you may guess how i
thought and speculated--thought of all the love that i had loved, and
all the useless strife and ambition, and now hung over my blackening
iron as the pain of ancient perplexities and disappointments beset me,
and then anon laughed and beat new life into the glowing metal as the
light of forgotten joys flashed for a moment on the fitful current
of my mind. ah! and again i forged hot and impetuous on my master's
rods and rivets as the old pulse of battles and onset swelled in my
veins--forged and hammered while the stream of such fancies bore me
on--until, unwitting, the very molten stuff beneath my hands took
form and fashion of my thoughts, and grew up into shining spear-heads
and white blades until the fantasy in turn was passed, and i checked
my fancies and saw, ashamed, the foolish work my busy hammer had
fashioned, and sadly broke the spear-heads and snapped the blades, and
came back with a sigh to meaner things.

my mind being thus full of all those wild adventures and wondrous
exploits i had seen and shared, when, as i was strolling one idle
morning down faulkener's dusty museum corridor, and sampling as i went
his precious tomes, that thing happened to which you owe this book. i
dipped into his missals and vellums as i sauntered from shelf to shelf,
and soon i found there was scarcely a page, scarcely a passage within
their mothy leathern covers that did not touch me nearly, or set me
thinking of something old and wonderful. there was not a page in all
that fingered, scholar-marked library, it seemed to me, upon which i
could not find something better or nearer to the shining truth to say
than they had who wrote those cupboard histories and philosophies; and
first i was only sad to see so much inaccurate set down, and then i
fell to sighing, as i turned the leaves of quaint treatise and pedantic
monkish diary, that they should write who knew so little, and i, who
knew so much, should be so dumb. and thus vague fancies began to form
within my mind, and, backed by the brooding memories strong within,
began to egg me on to write myself! jove! i had not touched a pen for
many hundred years, and yet here was the budding hunger for expression
rising strong within me, and i laughed and went over to old faulkener's
great oak table by the mullioned window, and took up his quill, and
turned it here and there, and looked on both ends of it, then presently
set it down with a shake of the head as a weapon past my wielding.
i felt the texture of his vellums and peered into the depth of his
inkpot, as though there were to see therein all those glowing facts and
fancies that i yearned to draw therefrom. but it would not do; not even
the challenge of those piled tomes, not even the handy means to the end
i coveted, could for a time break down my diffidence.

so i fell melancholy again, and wandered down that quaintly stocked
museum library, gazing ruefully on each sad remnant of humanity, and
thinking how quaint it was that i should come to dust my kinsmen's
skulls and tabulate those grim old heads that had so often wagged in
praise of me, then back again to the shelves, and pored and pondered
over the many-authored books, until, by hap, my eyes lit upon a passage
in an eastern tale that was so pregnant with experience, so fine, it
seemed to my mood, in fancy and philosophy, that it entranced me and
fired my zeal to a point naught else had done.

the ancient arabian narrator is telling how one came, in mid desert,
upon a splendid, ruined city--a silent, unpeopled town of voiceless
palaces and temples--and wandered on by empty street and fallen
greatness until, in the stateliest court of a thousand stately palaces,
he found an iron tablet, and on it was written these words:

in the name of god, the eternal, the everlasting throughout
all ages: in the name of god, who begetteth not, and who
is not begotten, and unto whom there is none like: in the
name of god, the mighty and powerful: in the name of the
living who dieth not. o thou who arrivest at this place,
be admonished by the misfortunes and calamities that thou
beholdest, and be not deceived by the world and its beauty,
and its falsity and calumny, and its fallacy and finery;
for it is a flatterer, a cheat, a traitor. its things are
borrowed, and it will take the loan from the borrower;
and it is like the confused visions of the sleeper, and
the dream of the dreamer. these are the characteristics
of the world: confide not therefore in it, nor incline
to it; for it will betray him who dependeth upon it, and
who in his affairs relieth upon it. fall not into its
snares, nor cling to its skirts. for i possessed four
thousand bay horses in a stable; and i married a thousand
damsels, all daughters of kings, high-bosomed virgins,
like moons; and i was blessed with a thousand children;
and i lived a thousand years, happy in mind and heart;
and i amassed riches such as the kings of the earth were
unable to procure, and i imagined that my enjoyments
would continue without failure. but i was not aware when
there alighted among us the terminator of delights, the
separator of companions, the desolator of abodes, the
ravager of inhabited mansions, the destroyer of the great
and the small, and the infants, and the children, and the
mothers. we had resided in this palace in security until
the event decreed by the lord of all creatures, the lord
of the heavens, and the lord of the earths, befell us, and
the thunder of the manifest truth assailed us, and there
died of us every day two, till a great company of us had
perished. so when i saw that destruction had entered our
dwellings, and had alighted among us, and drowned us in
the sea of deaths, i summoned a writer, and ordered him
to write these verses and admonitions and lessons, and
caused them to be engraved upon these doors and tablets
and tombs. i had an army comprising a thousand thousand
bridles, composed of hardy men, with spears, and coats of
mail and sharp swords, and strong arms; and i ordered them
to clothe themselves with the long coats of mail, and to
hang on the keen swords, and to place in rest the terrible
lances, and mount the high-blooded horses. then, when
the event appointed by the lord of all creatures, the
lord of the earth and the heavens, befell us, i said, o
companies of troops and soldiers, can ye prevent that which
hath befallen me from the mighty king? but the soldiers and
troops were unable to do so, and they said, how shall we
contend against him from whom none hath secluded, the lord
of the door that hath no doorkeeper? so i said, bring to me
the wealth! (and it was contained in a thousand pits, in
each of which were a thousand hundredweights of red gold,
and in them were varieties of pearls and jewels, and there
was the like quantity of white silver, with treasures such
as the kings of the earth were unable to procure.) and they
did so; and when they had brought the wealth before me,
i said to them, can ye deliver me by means of all these
riches, and purchase for me therewith one day during which
i may remain alive? but they could not do so. they resigned
themselves to destiny, and i submitted to god with patient
endurance of fate and affliction until he took my soul and
made me to dwell in my grave. and if thou ask concerning my
name, i am khoosh, the son of sheddád, the son of 'ad the
greater.

"oh, well written!" i cried. "well written, khoosh, the son of sheddád,
the son of 'ad the greater, well and wisely written, and also i will
write, for i have much to tell, and i too may some day be as thou art!"

thus was the beginning of this book. i got pen and ink and a volume of
unwritten leaves forthwith, and carried them away to a lonely chamber
in the thickness of a turret wall, a little forgotten cell some six
poor feet across, and there solitary i have written, and still write,
peopling by the flickering yellow lamp-light that stony niche with all
the brilliant memories that i harbor, letting my recollection wander
unshackled down the wondrous path that i have come, and step by
step, by episodes of pain and pleasure, by wild adventure and strange
mischance down, far down, from the ancient times i have brought you
until now, when my ink is still wet upon the events of yesterday, and i
cease for the moment.

this, then, is all that there is to say, all but one suggestive line.
i and yonder fair damsel have plighted troth under the apple-trees out
in her orchard! we have broken a ring, and she has one half of it and
i have the other. to-morrow will we tell her father, and presently be
married. 'tis a right sweet and winsome maid, and together, hand in
hand, we will rehabilitate this ancient pile, and dock that desert
garden, and get us friends, and troops of curly-headed children, and
lie and bask in the jolly sunshine of contentment--and so go hand in
hand forever down the pleasant ways of peaceful dalliance.

*       *       *       *       *

jove!--my pen, and a few poor minutes more from the bottom dregs of
life! it is over! all the long combat and turmoil, all the success
and disappointment, all the hoping and fearing. that which i thought
was a beginning turns out to be but an ending. my hand shakes as i
write, my life throbs, and my blood is on fire within me; i am dying,
friendless and alone as i have lived, dying in a niche in the wall with
my great unfinished diary before me--and, with the grim briefness of my
necessity, this is how it has happened.

i had wooed and won elizabeth faulkener, and, on the day after she had
come down into the forge, as was her wont, sweet and virginal; and i
was there at work, and took her into my arms; and, while we dallied
thus, there entered on us the ancient scholar and the swart steward.
gods! that villain blanched and scowled to see us so till his swart
face was whiter than the furnace ashes.

i took the maiden's hand, and boldly turning to her father told my
love and its accomplishment, whereat she burst from me and threw
herself upon his bosom, and, radiant with confusion, such a sweet
country pearl as any prince might well have stooped to raise, she
pleaded for us.

oh! a thousand thousand curses on that black fell shadow standing there
behind her! the father, relenting, kissed the fair white forehead of
that winsome girl. he bid emanuel bring at once a loving-cup, and,
while that foul traitor reeled away to fetch it, he joined our hands
and gave us, in tones of love and gentleness, his blessing.

then back came the scoundrel spaniard, his lean, hungry face all drawn
and puckered with his wicked passions, and in his hand a silver bowl
of wine. o jove! how cruel it flames within me now! my sweet maid
took it, and, rueful for the pain she had given black emanuel, spoke
fair and gentle, saying how we would ever stay his friends and do our
best to prosper him. and even i, generous like a soldier, echoed her
sweet words, telling that fell knave how, when the game was played
and finished, even the worst rivals might meet once more in good
comradeship. and so--while the mean spanish hound, with cruel jaw
dropped down and, hands a-twitching at his side, turned from us--his
tender mistress lifted the goblet to her lips and drank.

she drank, and because she was no courtly goblet-kissing dame, she
drank full and honest, then passed the troth-cup to me--and i laughed
and swept aside my phrygian beard, and happy once more and successful,
at the pink of my ambition, pledged those friendly two, pledged even
yon black-hearted scoundrel scowling there in the shade, then poured
all that sweet, rosy-tasting, love-cup of promise down my thirsty
throat.

gods! what was that at bottom of it? a pale, bitter white dreg. oh!
jove, what was this? i dipped a finger in and tried it, while a dead
hush fell upon us four. it was bitter, bitter as rue, cold, horrible,
and biting. my fingers tightened slowly round the goblet stem. i looked
at the sweet lady, and in a minute she was swaying to and fro in the
pale light like a fair white column, and then her hands were pressed
convulsive for a space upon her heart, while her knees trembled and her
body shook, and then, all in an instant, she locked her fair fingers
at arm's length above her head, and, with a long, low wail of fear and
anguish that shall haunt forever that stony corridor, she staggered and
dropped!

down went the goblet, and i caught her as she fell; and there she lay,
heaving a moment in my arms, then looked up and smiled at me--smiled
for one happy second her own dear smile of love and sunshine--then shut
her eyes, trembling a little, and presently lay still and pale upon my
bosom--dead!

fair, fair elizabeth faulkener!

i held her thus a space, and it was so still you could hear the gentle
draught of the curling smoke filtering up the chimney, and the merry
twitter of the swallows perched far above it. i held her so a space,
then kissed her fiercely and tender once upon her smooth forehead, and
gave the white girl to her father.

then turned i to the steward, the bitter passion and the deadly drug
surging together like molten lead within my veins. so turned i to him,
and our eyes met--and for a moment we glared upon each other so still
and grim that you could hear our hearts pulsing like iron hammers, and
at every beat a long year of terror and shame seemed to flit across
the ashy face of that coward iberian; he withered and grew old, grew
lean and haggard and pinched and bent in those few seconds i stared
at him. then, without taking an eye from his eyes, slowly my hand was
outstretched and my sword was lifted from the anvil where i had thrown
it. slowly, slowly i drew the weapon from its sheath and raised it, and
slow that villain went back, staring grimly the while, like the dead
man that he was, at the point. then on a sudden he screamed like a rat
in a gin, and turned and fled. and i was after him like the november
wind after the dead leaves. and round and round the forge we ran, fear
and bitter, bitter vengeance winging our heels; and round the anvil
with its idle hammer and cold half-welded iron swept that savage race;
round by where the pale father was bending over the soft dead form of
his sweet country girl; round the ruined chaos of the great broken
engine; round by the cobwebbed walls of that gloomy crypt; round by the
clattering heaps of iron in a mad, wild frenzy we swept--and then the
spaniard fled to a little oaken wicket in the stony wall leading by
many score of winding steps far out into the turrets above.

he tore the wicket open and plunged up that stony staircase, and i
was on his heels. up the clattering stairs we raced--gods, how the
fellow leaped and screamed--and so we came in a minute out into the air
again, out on to old andrew faulkener's ancient roof, out all among his
gargoyles and corbie steps, with the pleasant summer wind wafting the
blue smoke of luncheon-time about us, and the courtyard flags far, far
down below.

and there i set my teeth, and drew my sinews together, and wiped the
cold sweat of death from off my forehead, and stilled the wild, strong
tremors that were shaking my iron fabric, and, lost in a reckless
lust of vengeance, crouched to the spring that should have ended that
villain.

he saw it, and back he went step by step, screaming at every pace,
hideous and shrill; back step by step, with no eyes but for me; back
until he was, unknowing, at the very verge of the roof; back again
another pace--and then, jove! a reel and a stagger, and he was gone,
and, as i rushed forward and looked down, i saw him strike the parapets
a hundred feet below and bound into the air, and fall and strike again,
and spin like a wheel, and be now feet up and now head, and so, at
last, crash, with a dull, heavy thud, a horrid lifeless thing, on the
distant stones of that quiet courtyard!

*       *       *       *       *

it is over, and i in turn have time to laugh. i have come here, here to
my secret den in the thickness of these great walls, staggering slowly
here by dim, steep stairs, and rare-trodden landings--here to die; and
i have double-locked the oaken door, and shot the bolts and pitched the
key out of my one narrow window-slit, and, gently rocking and swaying
as the strong poison does its errand, i have thrown down my belt and
sword and opened my great volume once again.

misty the letters swim before me, and the strong pain ebbs and flows
within. all the room is hazy and dim, and i grow weak and feeble, and
my heavy head sags down upon the leaf i strive to finish. some other
time shall find that leaf, and me a dusty, ancient remnant. some other
hand shall turn these pages than those i meant them for: some other
eyes than theirs shall read and wonder, and perhaps regret. and now i
droop anon, and then start up, and the pale swinging haze seems taking
the shapes of friendliness and beauty. there are no longer limits to
this narrow kingdom, and before my footstool sweep in soft procession
all the shapes that i have known and loved. electra comes, a pale,
proud shade, sweeping down that violet road, and holding out her ivory
palm in queenly friendship; and numidea trips behind her, and nods and
smiles; and there is stalwart caius, his martial plumes brushing the
sky; and earlier sempronius, brave and gentle; and jolly tulus; and,
two and two, a trooping band of ancient comrades.

now have i looked up once more and laughed, and here they come trooping
again, those smiling shadows, and the fair thane is with them, her
plaited yellow hair gleaming upon her unruffled forehead; and by either
hand she leads a rosebud babe, who stretch small palms toward and
voiceless cries upon me; and white-bearded senlac; and, two and two, my
saxon serfs and franklins come gliding in. and there strides gallant
codrington, leading a pale shadow all in white, and isobel turns a
fair pale face upon me as she goes by. oh! i am dead--dead, i know it,
all but the hand which writes and the eyes that see, and i laugh as
the last fitful flashes of the pain and life fly through the loosening
fabric of my body.... and now, and now a hush has fallen on those
silent shades, and their hazy ranks have fallen wide apart, and through
them glides ruddy blodwen--blodwen, who comes to claim her own--and,
approaching, looks into my eyes, and all those stately shadows are
waiting, two and two, for us two to head them hence; and she, my
princess, my wife, has come near and touched my hand, and at that touch
the mantle of life falls from me!

blodwen! i come, i come!

the end

transcriber's notes

a number of typographical errors were corrected silently.

cover image is in the public domain.

transcriber's notes

obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. variations
in hyphenation have been standardised but all other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged.

italics are represented thus _italic_.

the
angel and the demon:
a tale.

by t. s. arthur.

philadelphia:
j. w. bradley, 48 north fourth street,
1859.

entered according to act of congress, in the year 1858, by

j. w. bradley,

in the clerk's office of the district court of the united states for the
eastern district of pennsylvania.

stereotyped by l. johnson & co.
philadelphia.

philadelphia:
printed by king & baird,
607 sansom street.

preface

we think few mothers can read this volume without being struck with
the great importance of care in regard to the dispositions and moral
qualities of those into whose hands they place their children. there
are sad disorders in society at the present time, and influences of
a baleful character at work: above all things, let tender, innocent
children be kept wholly beyond their sphere. in but rare cases should
there be a delegation of the mother's duties: extreme ill health is,
perhaps, the only excuse for such delegation; but when it is made,
let the nurse or governess be of known pure life and firm integrity.
there should be no guess-work here; no trusting of a stranger, unless
under the amplest testimonials from known parties; for wrong done to
childhood is, too often, wrong done for the whole life. but we can
only hint here at what we have endeavored to illustrate in the present
volume.

contents.

page
chap. i.—the young governess                                         9

ii.—gaining influence                                               21

iii.—trials                                                         32

iv.—worth and pretension                                            40

v.—the wind and the sun                                             48

vi.—the governess dismissed                                         60

vii.—a revelation                                                   71

viii.—the new governess                                             82

ix.—the shadow of evil                                              91

x.—a little breeze                                                 101

xi.—the demon unveiled                                             108

xii.—a fearful mystery                                             119

xiii.—doubt and anxiety                                            127

xiv.—painful consequences                                          138

xv.—alarming occurrence                                            150

xvi.—disappearance of madeline                                     158

xvii.—the search                                                   165

xviii.—a nest of pseudo-spiritualists                              189

xix.—the bird and the serpent                                      204

xx.—the rescue                                                     215

xxi.—the arrest                                                    223

xxii.—breaking the spell                                           236

xxiii.—the angel stronger than the demon                           245

xxiv.—an unexpected revelation                                     269

xxv.—a revelation                                                  278

xxvi.—reviewing the matter                                         287

xxvii.—getting right                                               298

xxviii.—conclusion                                                 304

the

angel and the demon.

chapter i.

the young governess.

mrs. dainty's health was poor, and her nerves delicate. it was no use,
she said: the wear and tear of body and mind were more than she could
stand. she must have a governess for the children. mr. dainty never
opposed his wife in any thing, and so replied,—

"very well, madeline. find your governess."

but uncle john—uncle johns, by-the-way, if they happen to be on the
mother's side, and old bachelors at that, are proverbially inclined to
interfere with the home-management of their nieces—had, as usual, a
word to say after he was alone with mrs. dainty.

"don't have any thing of the kind," said he. "be governess to your own
children."

"but i'm not equal to the task. it will kill me. see how thin and pale
i am getting; and my nerves are in a terrible condition."

"no wonder."

"why?"

"dissipation will destroy any woman's nerves."

"dissipation! why, uncle john!"

"how many nights were you out last week?"

"only three."

"only three! and each time until long after midnight. dancing, late
hours, hot suppers, and confectionery! no wonder your nerves are
shattered! such a life would kill me up in half a year."

"well, in my case, it is all that keeps me going. these social
recreations, coming at intervals upon the enervating cares of domestic
life, give new vitality to the exhausted system."

"filigree and nonsense!" replied uncle john, impatiently. "you know
better than to talk after this fashion."

and so, for the time, the debate closed between them.

meeting with no opposition from her husband, mrs. dainty proceeded
at once to the work of procuring a governess. among her fashionable
friends she first made inquiry, but in no direction could she hear of
the right individual. the qualifications were set forth at large.
she must speak french with the true parisian accent, and be able
to teach that language; her knowledge of music must be thorough;
she must be perfect in drawing and painting; her manners must be
ladylike, her tastes refined: in a word, she must possess all the high
accomplishments necessary to educate the children of a fashionable
mother who was "in society." she would greatly prefer a frenchwoman.

at last she heard of a "french lady," the daughter of a french count
of the old régime, who was desirous of procuring the situation of
governess in a family of "good standing." an interview with this lady
was held in the presence of uncle john, who took occasion to ask her
some questions about paris, where he had spent several years. the
stately manner and superior air which she assumed at the commencement
of the interview gradually gave way under these questions, until madame
showed considerable embarrassment.

"your face is very familiar to me," said uncle john, finally. "i am
sure i must have met you in paris."

"monsieur is undoubtedly mistaken," said the lady, with returning
dignity.

"perhaps so," replied uncle john. then, in a more serious voice,
he added, "but one thing is certain: you do not possess the
qualifications desired in the governess of my nieces."

the "french lady" offered no remonstrance, and asked for no
explanations, but, with a flushed face, arose and retired.

"better keep clear of counts' daughters," said uncle john, as the
applicant withdrew. "if you will have a governess for the children,
procure one born and bred so near at home that you can readily learn
all about her."

mrs. dainty, who was particularly attracted by the appearance of the
french lady, was not altogether pleased with uncle john's summary mode
of despatching her, though a little startled at the idea of getting an
impostor in her house.

what next was to be done? "suppose we advertise?" said mrs. dainty.

"and have your bell-wire broken before ten o'clock the next morning,"
replied uncle john. "take my advice, and wait a few days."

"what good will waiting do? unless we take some steps in the direction
we wish to go, we shall never arrive at the end of our journey."

"good steps have been taken," said uncle john, cheerfully. "you have
already made known to quite a number of your friends that you want a
governess. the fact will not die; many will remember and speak of it,
and somebody will happen to think of somebody who will just suit you."

so mrs. dainty concluded to wait a few days, and see what time would
bring forth.

on the third morning after the interview with the french count's
daughter, as mr. and mrs. dainty and uncle john sat talking together
on the governess-question, the waiter opened the door, and said that a
young woman wished to speak with mrs. dainty.

"who is she, and what does she want?" inquired mrs. dainty, with an air
of indifference, stroking the head of her king charles spaniel, which,
instead of her baby, occupied a comfortable position in her lap.

the servant went down to gain what information he could from the
visitor touching her business with mrs. dainty, and returned with the
information that she was an applicant for the situation of governess in
the family, having been informed that the lady wanted a person in that
capacity.

"tell her to come up," said mrs. dainty. "i wonder who she can be?" was
added, as the servant withdrew.

uncle john sat with his chin resting on the head of his cane,
apparently so much engaged with his own thoughts as to be unconscious
of what was passing.

in a few minutes the door reopened, and a young woman in plain attire,
and of modest, almost timid aspect, entered. mr. dainty was standing
with his back to the fire; mrs. dainty sat in her morning wrapper, with
the king charles spaniel still in comfortable quarters; and uncle john
remained in the same position, not stirring as the girl entered.

"take a chair," said mrs. dainty, with that supercilious indifference
which imagined superiority often puts on toward imagined inferiors.

the girl flushed, trembled, and sat down, letting her eyes fall to the
floor.

"what is your name?" asked mrs. dainty.

"florence harper," replied the girl.

"where do you live?"

"at no. — elwood street."

"with whom?"

"my aunt."

"are your father and mother living?"

"no, ma'am." even mrs. dainty felt the sadness with which this reply
was made.

"i am in want of a governess for my children," said mrs. dainty,
coldly; "but i hardly think you will suit."

the young girl arose at once.

"sit down." mrs. dainty spoke with a slight impatience. the visitor
resumed her chair, while mr. dainty kept his place before the fire,
with his eyes fixed upon her curiously.

"do you speak french?" inquired mrs. dainty.

"yes, ma'am."

"what french school did you attend?"

"i was with mr. picot for six years."

"indeed!" there was a new interest in mrs. dainty's voice.

"how is it in regard to your musical qualifications?" she continued.

"i will satisfy you, madam," said the applicant, in a quiet but firm
and dignified manner, "in regard to my ability to teach the various
branches of a polite education, by references, if you desire them."

"oh, certainly! i shall expect references, of course. you don't imagine
that i would take an entire stranger into my house without the most
rigid inquiries touching her character?"

miss harper arose.

"do you wish," said she, "to make any inquiries about me? or have you
concluded that i will not suit you?"

"you can leave your references," replied mrs. dainty.

the names of two ladies were given. mrs. dainty had no acquaintance
with them, but she knew their standing.

"that will do," she replied.

"shall i call again, or will you send me word if you desire to see me,"
said the young girl.

"you may call." mrs. dainty spoke in a very indifferent manner.

the visitor retired.

"i don't like her," said mrs. dainty.

"why not?" inquired uncle john, lifting, for the first time, his chin
from the head of his cane.

"too plebeian," said mrs. dainty.

"nothing but a countess will do for your young hopefuls," retorted
uncle john. "plebeian! there is the air of a lady in every movement.
take my advice, and learn all you can about her; and i'm mistaken if
you don't at once secure her services."

mrs. dainty's heart was set on having a governess; and, as no better
opportunity offered for procuring one, she made inquiries about miss
harper, and received encouraging information. a family council,
consisting of herself, husband, and uncle john, decided in the
affirmative on the question of engaging the young lady, who, as she
did not return to know whether her services would be desired or not,
was sent for. terms, duties, and the like being discussed and settled,
miss harper, with many misgivings and strong reluctance, assumed the
difficult and responsible position of governess in the family of mrs.
dainty.

three children were placed under her care: agnes, the eldest daughter,
now in her fourteenth year; madeline, the second, eleven years old; and
george, in his sixth summer. many unwise remarks had been made about
the young girl in the presence of the children; and when she assumed,
formally, the charge of them, she perceived at a glance that they
held her in contempt, and were not in the least inclined to obey her
authority.

the first day's trials were severe enough. mrs. dainty, in whose mind
there was a foregone conclusion adverse to the young governess, made
it her business to be present with her for some hours while giving her
introductory lessons to the children, or, rather, while making her
first efforts to dive into their minds and see what had already been
stored away. the mother did not act very wisely during the time; for
she was not a very wise woman. could she have seen the image of herself
as it was pictured in the mind of miss harper, she would not have felt
very much flattered. a small portion of light entered the region of
perception once or twice, the way being opened by a quiet answer to
some remark that broadly displayed her ignorance. one result followed
this rather meddlesome interference on the part of mrs. dainty. her
respect for the young governess was materially heightened.

on the second day, miss harper was left in the undisturbed charge of
her young pupils, and she had a better opportunity for studying their
natures. agnes, the oldest, she found to be indolent, proud, and quite
ready to imitate the example of her mother in disrespectful conduct
toward herself. madeline was of a gentler, more loving, and more
obedient disposition; while george was a rude, well-spoiled specimen of
a boy who showed no inclination whatever to come under even the mildest
discipline.

"she'll never do any thing with them," said mrs. dainty, in a confident
manner, as she sat alone with her husband and uncle john, on the
evening of the first day, and talked over the new arrangement.

"why do you think so?" asked uncle john.

"she's too young and inexperienced. she hasn't character enough. agnes
is almost as much of a woman as she is."

"don't be too sure of that," said uncle john.

"agnes will have to live very fast if she ever overtakes miss harper."

"she's rather an indifferent-looking personage," remarked mr. dainty,
in a careless way, "and hasn't stuff enough in her for the management
of three such spirited children as ours."

uncle john smiled.

"you are quite taken with her," said his niece.

"i haven't had much time for observation," replied uncle john; "but
the little i have seen impresses me favorably. beneath that modest,
quiet, almost timid exterior, there lies, if i am not mistaken, far
more reserved power than you imagine. give her a fair chance, second
her efforts in every attempt she makes to bring the children into order
and subordination, and particularly refrain from the slightest word in
their presence that will lower her in their respectful regard."

mrs. dainty saw, from the last remark, that she had erred in a very
thoughtless way; and her cheeks burned a little when uncle john added,—

"i have heard something of miss harper's history from a lady friend,
who represents her as a very superior girl, and says that she was
raised in a circle of refined and highly-intelligent people."

"oh, well, we can give her a trial. perhaps she will do," replied mrs.
dainty, in a languid manner. "i'm glad she has been raised among
refined people. my greatest fear was that she would impart vulgar
manners to the children."

"i don't think she can do them any harm." uncle john spoke a little
ironically.

"i hope not," said mrs. dainty, seriously; and the subject, not taking
a turn that was agreeable to her, dropped of its own weight.

we shall see, in another chapter, some of the results of this new
arrangement in the home of the fashionable mother.

chapter ii.

gaining influence.

having procured a governess for the children,—even if she were not all
that was expected in the individual who was to fill so important a
place,—our fashionable mother felt a weight of care removed from her
shoulders. she could now go out when she pleased, and stay as long as
she pleased, and not suffer from the troublesome consciousness that
she was neglecting her children,—a species of dereliction that never
escaped the watchful eyes of uncle john, who had no hesitation about
speaking plainly.

miss harper's experiences with the children on the first and second
days were not very encouraging; and this was particularly so in the
case of agnes, whose conduct toward her was exceedingly offensive.

on the third morning, this young lady positively refused to give her
french recitation at the time required by miss harper, declaring that
it was her wish to take a music-lesson. she had overheard her mother
and uncle john conversing on the subject of miss harper's authority
over the children, on which occasion mrs. dainty had said,—

"i will have no iron rule with agnes. miss harper must treat her with
that respectful consideration to which a young lady in her position is
entitled. there must be no petty domineering; no ordering with upstart
authority; no laying down of law."

"do you expect to be always present with miss harper in the
school-room?" uncle john asked quietly, as if he was really in earnest.

"of course not! what a preposterous idea!" replied mrs. dainty.

"then miss harper must have authority in your absence." uncle john
spoke very decidedly.

"agnes will never submit to any authority from her."

"why not from _her_, pray?"

"because agnes has reached an age when she can comprehend the wide
difference between their respective stations. she is almost a young
lady."

"you are a weak woman, madeline," said uncle john,—"a very weak woman,
and i am almost out of patience with you. now, do you wish to know,
plainly, how i regard this matter?"

"not particularly." mrs. dainty gaped as she spoke.

"you shall know, for all your well-bred indifference," said uncle
john, a little sharply. "in my opinion, miss harper is in every way
the superior to agnes, and, if i am not vastly mistaken, will in a few
years be recognised, in society, as superior."

"society!" mrs. dainty curled her lip. "what do you mean by society?"

"something more perhaps than you mean," was answered. "men and women
recognised by common consent as superior to the mass."

"well, you can talk as you please, and think as you please, uncle john;
but i'm not going to have agnes domineered over by this plebeian girl,
and if she attempt any thing of the kind, she will get her immediate
dismissal."

all of this was heard by agnes, who very naturally made up her mind to
be the director of her own studies in the absence of her mother.

"i wish to take my music-lesson now," she said, when the governess
asked for her french recitation.

"from twelve to one is the hour for music," replied miss harper,
mildly, yet firmly, fixing her eye steadily upon the eye of agnes.
there was something in the expression of that eye which the young lady
had never seen before, and which held her by a kind of fascination.
it was not anger, nor rebuke, nor sternness, but the quiet power of a
superior mind over that of an inferior. agnes tried to withdraw her
gaze, but it seemed impossible to do so. a strange feeling of respect,
almost awe came stealing into her heart and repressing her dominant
selfhood. when miss harper withdrew her steady gaze, agnes almost
caught her breath, so marked was the sense of relief that followed.

"madeline dear," said miss harper, in a cheerful, pleasant voice,
speaking to the younger sister, "shall i hear you read now?"

madeline came smiling to her side, and, lifting her book to her face,
read the lesson which had been given to her.

"very well done! you are improving already." miss harper spoke so
encouragingly that madeline looked up into her kind face, and said,
without thinking of the place and the occasion, "thank you!" the young
governess had already opened a way into her heart.

"now, agnes," said miss harper, "if you are ready with your french
lesson, i will hear it." she spoke kindly and cheerfully, fixing her
eyes at the same time steadily upon her, and with the same look of
quiet power which had subdued her a little while before.

"i would rather take my music-lesson first." agnes could not yield
without a show of resistance. something was due to pride.

"the hours of study were fixed in consultation with your mother," said
miss harper, mildly; "and it is my duty as well as yours to act in
conformity therewith."

"oh, mother won't care!" agnes spoke with animation. "if i prefer this
hour to twelve it will be all the same to her."

"your mother don't care for her word, agnes?" miss harper spoke in a
tone of surprise.

"i didn't mean that," was answered, with some little confusion of
manner. "i only meant that if she knew i preferred one time to another
she would not hesitate to gratify my wishes."

"very well. we will consult her this evening," said miss harper. "and
if she consents to a new arrangement of the study-hours i will make no
objection. but at present both you and i are bound to observe existing
rules. i have no power to change them if i would. so, come up to the
line cheerfully, to-day, and to-morrow we will both be governed by your
mother's decision."

agnes was subdued. without a sign of hesitation she went on with
her lesson in french, and said it all the better for this little
contention, through which she came with an entirely new impression of
miss harper.

when the young teacher came to george, this little reprobate would
do nothing that was required of him. his book he had, from the
commencement of the school-hours, refused to open; replying to every
request of miss harper to do so with a sullen, "a'n't a-going to."

"now, george, you will say your lesson," said miss harper, in a
pleasant tone.

"a'n't a-going to," replied the little fellow, pouting out his lips,
and scowling from beneath his knit brows.

"oh, yes; george will say his lesson."

"a'n't a-going to."

"oh, yes, georgie," said agnes, now coming to the aid of miss harper.
"say your lesson."

"a'n't a-going to." his lips stuck out farther, and his brow came lower
over his eyes.

"come, georgie, do say your lesson," urged agnes.

"a'n't a-going to." the resolute will of the child had no other
expression.

"i'll tell mother," said agnes.

"don't care! tell her! you wouldn't say _your_ lesson."

"oh, yes, georgie, agnes did say her lesson like a good girl; and so
did madeline." miss harper showed not the least excitement. her voice
was calm and her manner even. "now say yours."

"a'n't a-going to." the persistent little rebel had no idea of
capitulation.

"i knew a little boy once——"

there was such a pleasant, story-telling tone in the voice of miss
harper that george was betrayed into looking up into her face, when
she fixed his eye as she had, not long before, fixed the eye of his
self-willed sister.

"i knew a little boy once," she repeated, "who had no mother. before he
was as old as you are now, his mother died and went to heaven. poor,
dear little fellow! it was a sad day for him when his good mother died
and left him to the care of strangers."

george was all attention. already the unpleasant lines of frowning
disobedience were fading from his childish countenance, and a gentle,
earnest look coming into his eyes.

"after this little boy's mother died," went on the governess, "there
was nobody in the house to love him as she had done. his father was
absent all day, and very often did not get home in the evening until
poor little willy was fast asleep in bed. as it would not do to leave
willy alone with the cook and chambermaid, his father got a governess,
who was to have the care of him and teach him all his lessons. now, it
so happened that this governess was not kind and good as willy's mother
had been, but was selfish and cruel. she gave him long, hard lessons,
and if he did not get them—which he often could not—would punish him
cruelly; sometimes by shutting him up in a dark closet, sometimes by
making him go without eating, and sometimes by whipping him. and all
the while she managed to make willy's father believe that she was kind
and good to him.

"poor little willy! he grew pale and sad-looking, and no wonder. i was
at the house one day——"

"oh, miss harper! did you know him?" said george, with a countenance
full of interest.

"yes, dear, i knew little willy; and i knew his mother before she died.
as i was just saying, i called one day at the house, a few months after
his mother was taken away from him; and, as the servant opened the door
for me, i heard the voice of willy, and he was crying bitterly. all at
once the voice was hushed to a low, smothered sound.

"‘what is the matter with willy?' i asked; and the servant answered
that she supposed the governess was putting him into the dark closet
again. in an instant there seemed to stand before me the child's dead
mother, and she pointed upward with her finger. i did not stop to
think, but ran up-stairs into the nursery, where i found the governess
sitting by the window with a book in her hand.

"‘where's willy?' i demanded. she started, and looked very much
surprised and a little angry. but i was in earnest.

"‘where's willy?' i repeated my question more sternly. as she did not
stir, i went quickly across the room and opened a closet door, which i
found locked, with the key on the outside. there, lying on his face,
was the dear child. i took him up in my arms and turned his face to the
light. it was pale as marble. i thought he was dead.

"‘bring me some water,' i called, in a loud, quick voice. the
frightened governess fled from the room, but soon returned with water.
i threw it into the dear child's face, and rubbed his hands and feet.
in a few minutes, he began to breathe.

"‘give him to me, now,' said the governess, endeavoring to lift him
from my arms. but i said, ‘no; cruel woman!' she looked angry, but i
was not moved. ‘untie my bonnet-strings,' i spoke to the chambermaid;
and the girl took off my bonnet.

"‘jenny,' said i to the chambermaid,—i knew her name,—‘jenny, i want
you to go for willy's father.'

"jenny did not hesitate a minute. ‘there's no use in sending for his
father,' said the governess. but we didn't mind what she said. when
willy's father came, she was gone. he was very much distressed when
he saw his dear little boy, and very angry when i told him about the
dark closet. after that i became willy's nurse and teacher. but he did
not stay with us very long. the angels came for him one lovely summer
evening, and bore him up to the heavenly land; and he is now happy
again with his mother."

tears came into the eyes of all the children when florence harper
ceased speaking. she had found the way to their hearts, and, not only
this, had lifted for them just so much of the veil that concealed her
true character as to let them see enough to win something of love and
something of respectful consideration.

the book was still in the hand of george, and, as he let his eyes fall
from the face of miss harper, they rested on the open page. nothing
was said by the latter. a few moments of silence passed, and then
george, in a low but rather earnest voice, said over his lesson.

the young governess had conquered.

chapter iii.

trials.

it was late when mrs. dainty came home. her husband had already
arrived, and was waiting for his dinner. george and madeline, pleased
as children usually are when the visiting mother returns from her
recreations, crowded around her with their questions and complaints,
and annoyed and hindered her to a degree that broke down her small
stock of patience.

"miss harper!" she called, in a fretful voice, going to her
chamber-door.

the governess heard, and answered from her room, leaving it at the same
time, and coming down toward the chamber of mrs. dainty.

"call those children away!" said the mother, sharply. "and see here!
when i come home next time, don't let them beset me like so many hungry
wolves. i've hired you to take the care of them, and i want the care
taken. that's your business."

mrs. dainty was annoyed and angry; and she looked her real character
for the time. she was a superior, commanding an inferior, with a
complete consciousness of the gulf that stretched between them. her
manner, even more than her words, was offensive to the young governess,
whose native independence and self-respect impelled her at once to
resign her position and leave the house.

"george; madeline." she spoke quietly,—almost indifferently.

"why don't you call them as if you had some life in you?" exclaimed
mrs. dainty, losing all patience.

miss harper turned away without a word, and went up-stairs, intending
to put on her bonnet and leave the house. near her room-door she met
uncle john, who had overheard the offensive language of his niece. he
saw that the young girl's face wore an indignant flush, and that both
lips and eyes indicated a settled purpose.

"what are you going to do?" he asked, letting her see by look and tone
that he understood her feelings.

"i am going away from here," she replied, firmly.

"you must not do it," said uncle john.

"self-respect will not permit me to remain," answered florence.

"feeling must yield to duty, my dear young lady," said uncle john,
with an earnestness that showed how much he was interested.

"my duty is not here," was the slowly-spoken answer.

"our duty is where we can do the most good. i know something of
your morning's trials and wise discipline. you have done nobly,
florence,—nobly. there is good in these children, and you must bring it
forth to the light."

"i am but human," said florence, with a quivering lip.

"you are gold in the crucible," replied uncle john. "the fire may be
very hot, my dear young friend; but it will leave no mark upon your
real character. it is not every spirit that has a quality pure enough
to meet life's higher ordeals. no, no: shrink not from the trials in
your way. the lions are chained, and can only growl and shake at you
their terrible manes. go back for the children. for their sakes, draw
them to yourself with the singular power you possess. be to them all
their mother fails to be. and always regard me as your friend and
advocate."

uncle john left her and went back to his own room. a few moments
florence stood irresolute. then, stepping to the head of the stairs,
she called to george, who was pounding at his mother's door. mrs.
dainty had re-entered her chamber and locked it against the children.
the child did not heed her in the least. going down to him, and taking
his hand, which the stubborn little fellow tried to prevent her from
doing, she said, in a voice that was very kind, and in a tone full of
interest,—

"george, dear, did i ever show you my book of pictures?"

instantly the firm, resisting hand lay passively in hers; though he
neither looked up nor answered.

"it is full of the sweetest pictures you ever saw,—birds, and sheep,
and horses; children playing in the woods; and ducks and geese swimming
in the water."

"won't you show them to me?" said the child, turning to his young
teacher, and half forgetting, already, in the pleasing images she had
created in his thoughts, his angry disappointment in being thrust from
his mother's room.

"yes; and you shall look at them just as long as you please," answered
florence.

madeline had thrown herself upon the passage-floor in a stubborn
fit. her mother's discipline in the case, if the child had remained
there until she came from her chamber, would have been to jerk her
up passionately, and, while passion remained in the rapidly-acquired
ascendant, inflict upon her from two to half a dozen blows with her
hand. wild, angry screams would have followed; and then the repentant
mother would have soothed her child with promised favors.

"madeline must see them also," said miss harper, pausing and stooping
over the unhappy little girl. "don't you want to see my picture
scrap-book?" she spoke very cheerfully.

"oh, yes, madeline! do come! miss harper is going to show us a book
full of such beautiful pictures."

the voice of george went home. madeline arose to her feet. taking,
each, a hand of their governess, the two children went with light feet
up to her room, and in her book of pictures soon lost all marks of
their recent unhappy disturbance.

mrs. dainty appeared at the dinner-table in a bad humor, and commenced
scolding about the new governess.

"she'll have to do better than this, before i am suited with her," she
said, captiously.

"what's the matter now?" asked mr. dainty, in a manner that exhibited
some annoyance.

"matter!" replied his wife. "i guess you'd think it was some matter,
if, when you came in late, tired and hungry, the whole body of children
were to hover around you with their thousand wants and complaints.
it's miss harper's business to keep them out of the way. she's paid for
doing it. i had to call her down from her room, and when i spoke to
her sharply she turned herself from me with an air of offended dignity
that was perfectly ridiculous. the upstart! i shall have it out with
her this afternoon. no domestic shall treat me with even a shadow of
disrespect. i scarcely think she comprehends her true position in the
family; but i will enlighten her fully."

the children listened with wide open ears, from agnes down to george.
mr. dainty made no response, and uncle john merely remarked, "i hope
you will think twice before you act once in this business of defining
miss harper's position and making yourself clearly understood. my
advice is, to be very sure that you understand yourself first."

there was nothing to offend in the manner of uncle john. he spoke in
sober earnest.

"mother," said agnes, breaking in through the pause that followed uncle
john's remark, "did you say that i should take my french lesson first?"

"no: who said that i did?" mrs. dainty answered, without a moment's
reflection.

"why, miss harper said so, and made me give my french recitation before
i was ready for it."

"i said no such thing." mrs. dainty spoke with some indignation, born
of a vague notion, from what agnes had said, that the young governess
was assuming arbitrary rule over the children, and falsely quoting her
as authority. "i said no such thing! what does she mean by it?"

"well, she said you did, and made me say a lesson before i had half
learned it. that's not the way to do!"

"oh, dear!" exclaimed mrs. dainty. "here comes the trouble i feared!
give these vulgar people a position a little in advance of what they
have been used to, and forthwith they take on airs. i saw it in the
girl at the first interview. i knew then that she wouldn't suit, and if
my judgment hadn't been overruled she never would have come into the
house."

mrs. dainty glanced toward meddlesome uncle john as she said this. but
uncle john did not seem to be in the least disturbed.

"agnes," said he, looking across the table at the injured and
complaining girl, "what lesson did you propose to recite in place of
your french?"

agnes flushed a little as she answered,—

"my music-lesson."

"ah! that was the substitute. what about it?" and uncle john turned his
quiet eyes upon the countenance of his niece. "if i am not mistaken, i
heard you tell miss harper that you thought the hour from twelve to one
the best for music."

"maybe i did," answered mrs. dainty, pettishly; "but i didn't fix it
as a law more binding than the statutes of the medes and persians.
something was left to the girl's own discretion."

"and i think it will be found on examination," said uncle john, "that
she used the discretion wisely."

"oh, but she said"—agnes had taken her cue from her mother—"that the
hours for study had positively been fixed by mother, and that she had
no authority to vary them in the least."

"preposterous!" ejaculated mrs. dainty.

"what's the news to-day?" said uncle john, turning to mr. dainty. "any
thing of importance stirring in the city?"

he wished to change a subject the discussion of which could do nothing
but harm among the children.

the answer of mr. dainty led the conversation into an entirely new
channel. once or twice, during the dinner-hour, mrs. dainty tried to
renew her complaints against the governess; but uncle john managed to
throw her off, and so the matter was dropped for the time.

chapter iv.

worth and pretension.

the manner in which florence harper met the insolence of mrs. dainty—we
give her conduct its true designation—chafed that high-spirited lady
exceedingly. she could neither forget nor forgive such conduct in an
inferior. what right had she to exhibit an independent spirit?—to show
a womanly pride that would not brook an outrage? the very thought
made the hot blood leap along the veins of indignant mrs. dainty.
oh, yes. she would "have it out with her!" so, toward the middle
of the afternoon, florence was sent for, and she went down to the
sitting-room where mrs. dainty was alone. uncle john was on the alert.
he had remained in his own apartment, listening, with the door ajar,
for nearly an hour, and heard the summons given to florence. he was
in the sitting-room almost as soon as she was, and in time to prevent
an interview, the result of which would, in all probability, be the
withdrawal of miss harper from the family. his niece looked at him
with a frown as he entered. an offensive interrogation was just on her
tongue, but she repressed the words, substituting therefor this query:—

"when did we fix the hours of study for the children, miss harper?"

"on the day before yesterday, ma'am," replied florence, in a calm,
respectful voice.

"i never had any thing to say to you on the subject!" mrs. dainty lost
temper, and, of course, dignity and self-respect.

"was not ten o'clock mentioned by you as the hour when it would be best
to commence the lessons?" inquired florence.

"if it was, that doesn't mean fixing all the hours of study!"

"you said you wished agnes to begin with french," said florence,
quietly.

"well, suppose i did: what then?"

"only, that i understood you to mean that you wished her to let french
constitute her first lesson as most important. you will, no doubt,
remember that i approved this, as her mind would always come fresh to
the study."

"approved!" mrs. dainty could not repress this manifestation of
contempt.

"you will also remember, that you spoke of the hour from twelve to one
as most suitable for music."

miss harper looked at the excited lady with a steady gaze.

"and upon that you based a set of arbitrary rules, and tried to enforce
them by representing me as their author!"

"no, madam, i did no such thing." florence drew her slender form up
to its full height, and looked calmly, steadily, and with an air of
dignified self-respect upon mrs. dainty. "i simply remained firm to my
duty when agnes wished to begin with music; and said to her, that the
hours of study had been arranged in consultation with you, and that
i had no authority to change them. so i understood the matter, and,
in my action, simply regarded the good of your child. i did not, of
course, permit my pupil to direct the plan of study, and only yielded
a reference to you in order to make my firmness of purpose the less
offensive to her pride. and you must forgive me, madam, for saying,
that it is neither just to me nor your children thus to react upon my
honest efforts to meet your wishes in regard to their studies, and
serve at the same time their best interests as a teacher. i wish,
for the sake of your children, you knew me better. as it is, if you
desire me to remain their instructor, you must either fix the hours
and subjects of study in so plain a way that no one can mistake them,
or leave it altogether in my hands. in either case, i will guarantee
submission on the part of the children."

the outraged pride of mrs. dainty broke through the pressure of
involuntary respect which the dignified, resolute, perfectly
independent manner of the young teacher had inspired, and the word
"impertinent!" was on her lips, when uncle john said,—

"miss harper is clearly right, and i am pleased to know that she has
acted with so much firmness and so much prudence. she is entitled to
praise, not blame."

mrs. dainty waved her hand for the governess to leave the room. without
a word, or the slightest apparent hesitation, miss harper retired.

"uncle john!" mrs. dainty turned angrily upon the old gentleman the
moment they were alone, "i am out of all patience with you! what chance
have i to command respect from inferiors in my house, if you step in to
justify them to my face when i am attempting to blame improper actions?
it's an outrage, and i won't have it!"

"there is only one way to command the respect of your household,
madeline," replied uncle john, "and that is, to treat them with
kindness and justice. you may demand respect from those whom you
regard as your inferiors, forever; but, unless your actions toward them
be marked with dignity and ladylike self-possession, your command will
be no more heeded than was that of the old british king who commanded
the waves of the sea to stop their advancing course. respect or
contempt is an independent thing, and always has free course. if a lady
desires the first, she has to do something more than utter her proud
behest. she has got to deserve it; and, if she fail in this, she will
surely have the last,—contempt."

"i don't wish to hear any more of that," replied mrs. dainty, curtly.
"i hardly think it fair to seek a justification of your own conduct in
turning around and assailing me. what right had you to approve miss
harper's conduct to her face, when i was blaming her?"

"the common right which every one has to drag another from the brink
of a precipice over which he is about blindly casting himself. i have
observed miss harper very closely since she has been in the house, and
at times when she could not be aware of this observation. when you
have been in the street, i have been at home, watching her deportment
among the children; and it has always been kind, wise, and consistent.
there has been no shadow of that domineering spirit of which you seem
so nervously afraid, but always a firmness that knew just how far to
yield, and how far to be immovable. i happened to hear all that passed
in regard to the french and music lessons. agnes was all to blame, and
florence was all right. it was beautiful to see with what a gentle
dignity florence met the efforts of agnes to be mistress instead of
scholar, and how wisely she subdued the incipient lady's rebellious
pride. she gave no offence in doing so, but really won upon her kind
feelings; and, but for the opportunity given her pride to speak out its
mortification, you would never have heard a word of complaint.

"you will thus understand," continued uncle john, "why i threw in a
word of justification in time to prevent the utterance of language
on your part, which would inevitably have resulted in the loss of a
governess for your children who has already gained more power over
them for good than any other being in the world possesses. and now,
madeline, let me warn you against any further exhibitions of passion,
pride, or contempt toward one into whose hands you have committed the
well-being of your children. seek to elevate, not depress her. treat
her with respect and consideration, and your children will do the same.
you make her the guide, counsellor, and companion of your children.
think of the vast influence she must exercise over them! the work of
forming their young minds—of directing their characters—is in her
hands, not yours. the mother's high prerogative you choose to delegate
to one regarded as an inferior. happily, in this case, the choice of
a representative has not been foolishly made. in all respects miss
harper is qualified for her position, and, if sustained in it, will act
her part nobly. she is no common person, let me tell you, but one of
superior mind, high moral worth, and almost perfect accomplishments,—in
a word, a model for your children! but she is, at the same time, a
young woman with too much self-respect to bear your haughty, insulting
manners. if you wish to keep her, therefore, you must not repeat the
offences of to-day."

"does she expect me to curtsy every time i meet her, and to say, ‘if
you please,' and ‘by your leave, miss'?" the lips of mrs. dainty
curled, and he looked very scornful.

"no,—nothing of the kind. only that you shall treat her with common
decency,—which you have not done!" uncle john was provoked.

"you are quite complimentary, i must confess," said mrs. dainty, with
an offended manner.

"i speak the truth, and that is always the highest compliment i shall
ever pay you, my foolish niece!" retorted uncle john, who used his
prerogative, in most cases, to the full extent.

"i think we had better drop this subject," said mrs. dainty.

"very well; let it drop now. i will renew it again when your feelings
are less excited and your judgment less obscured. only let me repeat
my warning about miss harper. you have an angel in your dwelling: let
her remain to bless your children. but the guest will not remain if you
treat her as though she were a spirit of evil."

chapter v.

the wind and the sun.

"mother, can't i take my music-lesson first?" said agnes. it was on the
morning after her fruitless effort to be mistress instead of scholar.

mrs. dainty was in the middle of one of the most absorbing chapters
of the "mysteries of paris," a book which she had read until
twelve o'clock on the night previous, and to which she had turned,
immediately after her late breakfast, with the eagerness of a mere
excitement-lover. she did not heed her daughter's question. only the
sound of a disturbing voice was perceived.

"mother!" agnes uttered her name in a loud, impatient tone, grasping
her arm as she spoke, and shaking it to attract attention.

"what do you want, you troublesome girl?" mrs. dainty turned angrily
toward her daughter.

"can't i take my music-lesson first?"

"i don't care what lesson you take first! go away, and don't disturb
me!"

this was the mother's thoughtless answer. agnes glided away in
triumph, and mrs. dainty's eyes fell back to the pages of her book,
unconscious of the meaning of her reply.

"i'm going to take my music-lesson first!" said agnes, as she came into
the study-room, where miss harper was seated with george and madeline.
and she tightened her lips firmly, elevated her chin, and tossed her
head jauntily, while from her clear, dark eyes looked out upon her
teacher a spirit of proud defiance.

"very well," replied florence, in a voice that showed not the slightest
disturbance. "at twelve o'clock i will be ready to give the lesson."

"i'm going to take it now," said agnes, drawing up her petite form
to its extreme height, and looking, or rather trying to look, very
imperious.

miss harper could scarcely help smiling; but she repressed all feeling,
and merely answered,—

"you can practise your scales for the next two hours, if you prefer
doing so, agnes. at twelve i will give you a lesson."

"i'll go and tell mother that you won't give me my music-lesson!" said
the baffled, indignant girl, flirting out of the room.

"mother!" she had grasped the arm of her mother again.

"go away, and don't annoy me!" mrs. dainty threw out her arm, and
swept her daughter away from her side.

"mother!" agnes had pressed back again, determined that she would be
heard.

"what do you want?" mrs. dainty dropped her book from before her face,
and turned, with anger flashing in her eyes, upon her daughter.

"miss harper won't give me my music-lesson!"

"oh, dear! there's to be nothing but trouble with that stuck-up girl!"
exclaimed mrs. dainty. "i saw it from the first."

and, tossing her book from her, she started up, and went with quick
steps and a burning face to the room where miss harper sat with the two
children next younger than agnes, who were leaning upon her and looking
up into her face, gathering intelligence from her eyes as well as her
fitly-spoken words.

"see here, miss!" exclaimed mrs. dainty, as she came sweeping into the
room, "i'm getting tired of this kind of work, and it must end! what do
you mean by refusing to give agnes her music-lesson?"

"do you wish her music to precede her french?" very calmly, and with
a quiet dignity that rebuked the excited mother, was this question
asked; but mrs. dainty was partially blinded by anger, and, obeying an
ill-natured impulse, made answer,—

"i want no airs nor assumptions from such as you! i hired you to
instruct the children, not to set them by the ears. i saw from the
beginning that you wouldn't suit this house,—that a little brief
authority would make a tyrant of you, as it does of all vulgar minds."

mrs. dainty was losing herself entirely.

the face of miss harper flushed instantly, and for a moment or two
an indignant fire burned in her eyes. but right thoughts soon find
a controlling influence in all superior minds. the assailed young
governess regained, almost as quickly as it had been lost, her calmness
of exterior; nor was this calmness merely on the surface. she made
no further remark, until the stubble fire in mrs. dainty's mind had
flashed up to its full height and then died down for want of solid
fuel. then, in a voice that betrayed nothing of disturbed feeling, she
said,—

"if it is your wish, madam, that agnes should take her music-lesson
first, i have no objection. my duty is to teach her, and i am trying to
do so faithfully. but things must be done in order. establish any rules
you deem best, and i will adhere to them faithfully."

"give agnes her music-lesson!" mrs. dainty spoke with an offensive
imperiousness, waving her hand toward the door.

miss harper did not move.

"do you hear me?" exclaimed mrs. dainty. the fires had received a new
supply of stubble.

"fool!"

mrs. dainty turned quickly, a shame-spot already on her cheek, and met
the angry eyes and contemptuous face of uncle john, who had thrown his
voice into her ears alone.

"fool!" his lips shaped the word for her eyes; and she saw it as
plainly as if it had been written in staring capitals.

uncle john beckoned to her with his head, stepping back as he did so,
in order to prevent the other inmates of the room from seeing him.
mrs. dainty obeyed the signal, and, without venturing another remark,
retired from the study-room, and, sweeping past uncle john, sought
refuge in her own chamber.

"a'n't you going to give me my music-lesson, miss?"

if her mother had retired from the field, there was no disposition
whatever on the part of agnes to follow her example.

"certainly," was the mild, evenly-spoken answer.

"come along, then, and give it to me now."

"i will be ready at twelve o'clock, agnes."

"mother told you to give it to me now, and you've got to do so."

"oh, don't talk so to miss harper, aggy!" said madeline, her voice
trembling and her eyes filling with tears.

the words came just in season. miss harper felt that all this was more
than she ought to bear; and outraged pride was about rising above
convictions of duty.

"georgy and i love you. we will say our lessons." the sweet child
lifted her large, beautiful eyes to the face of her governess.

"tell us a story, won't you, miss harper?"

it was george who made the request.

"as soon as you and madeline have said your lessons, i will tell you a
nice little story." and florence won him to her will with a kiss.

the lesson-books were opened instantly, and, the light tasks set, the
little ones entered upon them with willing spirits.

"come and give me my music-lesson!" broke in, discordantly, the voice
of agnes.

"at twelve o'clock, agnes." there was not the smallest sign of
disturbed feeling in the manner of the governess.

"mother will turn you out of the house! i heard her say so!"

a red spot painted itself on the brow of miss harper. but it faded as
quickly as it came.

seeing that she was not to have her will with the governess, agnes
flirted from the room, and sought the apartment to which her mother had
retired.

"mother! mother! that upstart thing says she won't give me my
music-lesson for you nor anybody else!"

now agnes went a step too far, and at the wrong moment. it was just
then dawning upon the mind of mrs. dainty that her daughter had
exaggerated the conduct of miss harper, and led her into an unladylike
exhibition of herself. the sting of mortification excited her quite
enough to make her turn with sharp acrimony upon this wilful daughter.

"i don't believe a word of it!" she said, angrily. "all this trouble
has grown out of your bad conduct. go off and say your lessons at the
right time. i won't be annoyed in this way any longer."

"but, mother——"

mrs. dainty took her by the arm and thrust her from the room, saying,
passionately,—

"don't let me see your face again to-day!"

for several minutes agnes sat upon the stairs leading up to the
study-room, so disappointed and mortified that only anger kept her
from tears. down from this room came the low murmur of voices; and
her ears recognised now that of madeline or george, and now that of
miss harper. how musical was the latter, compared with the sound of
her mother's rebuking tones that were still in her ears! in spite of
pride and self-will, her heart acknowledged the contrast; and, with
this acknowledgment, touches of shame were felt. even with mean false
accusation on her side, self-will had failed to triumph. success would
have blinded her to the quality of her own spirit; but failure made her
vision clearer.

all remained still in the mother's chamber and still through the house,
as the mortified girl sat almost crouching on the stairs, and quiet was
only disturbed faintly by the muffled voices that were heard in the
study-room.

agnes could not help but think, for passion was subsiding; and thought
dwelt naturally upon the persons and circumstances by which passion had
been aroused into turbulence. a contrast between the mother's spirit
and the spirit thus far shown by miss harper forced itself upon her
mind, and she saw the beauty of the one and the deformity of the other.
in spite of her pride, a feeling of respect for miss harper was born;
and with this respect something of contempt for her weak, passionate
mother found an existence.

"now tell us the story, won't you, miss harper?"

it was the voice of george, ringing down from the study-room. the
lessons were over; and the promised story was to come.

scarcely conscious of what she was doing, agnes moved quietly up the
stairs, until she was near enough to the door of the study-room to hear
distinctly.

"there was once a little flower-bud." miss harper began her story in a
low voice, and agnes leaned forward, listening earnestly. "it was very
small, and two green leaves gathered their arms closely around it, for
there was a hidden treasure of sweetness in the heart of that bud. one
day the cold, angry wind came along, and wanted the bud to open her
beautiful pink leaves and give out from her heart the sweet perfumes
that were hidden there. he blew harshly upon her, throwing her little
head first on one side and then upon the other, and called angrily for
her to open, that her sweetness might breathe in his ugly face. but the
two green leaves only hugged their arms closer around the bud. then he
dashed her head upon the ground, and tried to trample the life out of
her; for he did not love her at all: he only loved himself. the light
stem that held the bud did not break, but only bent down, and, when the
cruel wind was gone, raised up again from the ground and lifted the
bud into the warm sunshine that was coming abroad.

"it was very different when the gentle, loving sunshine came and asked
the two green leaves to unclasp themselves and let the bud grow into a
flower, that the sweetness might come out of its little heart. greener
and softer grew these leaves, and they seemed almost to smile with
pleasure, as they gently fell back from the swelling bud, that opened
and opened in the face of the sunshine until it became a beautiful
flower, the perfume in its heart filling all the air around."

miss harper paused.

"what a sweet story!" said madeline, looking still into the face of her
governess, and with wondering eyes, for she felt, child as she was,
that the story had a signification.

"love and kindness are always better than anger," said miss harper,
answering the child's eyes.

"the sunshine was love?" said madeline.

"yes; and the cold wind was anger."

"and what was the flower?" asked the child.

"you and george are human flowers, dear;" and, from the swelling love
in her pure spirit, miss harper pressed a kiss on the lips of both the
children.

"am i a flower?" asked george.

"i call you a little human flower," answered the governess,—"a little
human flower, with love in your heart, hidden away there like sweetness
in the heart of the bud i was telling you about. will you let me be
your sunshine?"

the wayward boy flung his arms around the neck of florence and clasped
her tightly, but without speaking. he felt more than he could utter.

a tear dropped upon the hand of agnes, as she sat upon the stairs near
the door of the study-room. it seemed to her as if heaven were in that
room, while she was on the outside. never in her life had she felt so
strangely; never had such a sense of desolation oppressed her. that
lesson of the bud, the wind, and the sunshine,—how deeply it had sunk
into her heart! acting from a sudden impulse, she started up, and,
going in where the young governess sat with an arm drawn around each
of the two children, she said, with burning eyes, and a voice unsteady
from emotion,—

"be my sunshine also, miss harper! oh, be my sunshine! i have long
enough been hurt by the angry wind!"

an appeal so unlooked for surprised florence; but she did not hesitate.
rising instantly, she took the extended hands of agnes in both of hers,
and answered,—

"i have only sunshine to give, dear agnes. regard me no longer as an
enemy and an oppressor. i am your friend."

"i know it, i know it, miss harper!"

"your true friend," added florence, kissing her. "and now," she added,
in a sweet, persuasive voice, "let us make this room sacred to peace,
order, and instruction, and open all its windows for love's warm
sunshine to stream in upon us daily."

"it shall be no fault of mine if otherwise," was the low, earnest reply
of the young girl, whom love had conquered.

chapter vi.

the governess dismissed.

"how do you like your governess?" inquired a fashionable friend, who
was making a call upon mrs. dainty.

mrs. dainty shook her head and pursed up her lips in a vulgar way that
was natural to her.

"not perfect, of course," said the friend.

"no,—not within a thousand miles of perfection."

"an american girl, i presume?"

"yes." the lip of mrs. dainty assumed a curl of contempt.

"poor american girls are an indifferent set," remarked the lady. "a'n't
you afraid that your children will, imperceptibly, imbibe her low
habits and vulgar ways of speaking?"

"yes; that is my greatest fear. already i think i see a change."

"i wouldn't keep her an hour, if that were the case," said the lady.
"no, not for the fraction of an hour!" she added, with emphasis. "i
had almost as soon see my children vicious as vulgar; for vice may be
eradicated, but vulgarity is a stain nothing can polish out."

"and, to add to her offence," remarked mrs. dainty, "she has assumed an
upstart authority which has kept the house in hot water ever since she
came into it. the children, and particularly agnes, will not submit to
her rules and exactions."

"why don't you pack her off? i'd do it in less than no time," said the
refined acquaintance.

"i've about made up my mind to do it, and in spite of all opposition."

"opposition! who has any right to oppose?"

"that fussy old uncle of mine is always meddling in our affairs,—uncle
john."

"why do you keep him about the house?"

"he's my mother's brother," replied mrs. dainty. she could have given a
better reason; but it would have been at the expense of an exposure of
selfishness she did not care to make.

"if he were my mother's great-grandfather, he couldn't find harbor in
my house if he interfered in what didn't concern him," said the lady.

mrs. dainty sighed. uncle john was a great trouble to her, for he
would say what he thought and do what he pleased. but then uncle john
owned the house they lived in, which they occupied rent free, or in
compensation for board. and, moreover, uncle john was worth two or
three dollars where her not over-thrifty husband was worth one. no, no.
it wouldn't just answer to turn uncle john out of the house; for that
would be a losing business.

"if i could only find the right stamp of a governess," said mrs.
dainty, sighing again.

"i think i know a person who would just suit you."

"oh, indeed! where can i see her?"

"have you any acquaintance with mrs. ashton?"

"no,—though i have long desired to be numbered among her friends."

"only yesterday she mentioned to me," said the visitor, "that she knew
a highly-accomplished english lady, a widow, whose husband died in the
east india company's service, and asked me to bear her in remembrance
if i should hear of any one who wanted a governess."

"how fortunate!" exclaimed mrs. dainty. "an educated english lady! what
more could i desire?"

"nothing. shall i speak to mrs. ashton about you, and learn the lady's
address?"

"by all means. won't you see her this very day?"

"if you desire it."

"oh, i do desire it above all things."

"i will see the lady for you."

"how kind of you!"

"shall i say that you wish to engage her?"

"oh, by all means!"

"what will you do with your american girl?" asked the lady.

"give her notice to quit immediately. she shall not pass another night
under this roof: my mind is made up to that. the way she has acted this
day decides me."

"at what time shall i tell this english lady to call?"

"i will see her at four this afternoon."

"very well."

"in the mean time i will close up matters with miss harper."

"is that the name of your present governess?" inquired the lady,
evincing some interest.

"yes."

"florence harper?"

"yes. do you know any thing about her?"

"i knew her mother when i was a girl," replied the lady,—"though i
never fancied her a great deal. she had too much mock dignity for me.
she married very well, and for some time moved in moderately good
society. but her husband failed in business several years ago, and
died shortly afterward, i think. so it is her daughter you have for
a governess! how things will come around! there was a time when she
seemed to think i wasn't good enough to associate with her; and now her
daughter has come down to the position of a hireling. well, well! isn't
this a queer world? if florence is like her mother, i don't think she
will suit."

"she puts on airs above her station," said mrs. dainty.

"an inherited fault. her mother had a way of looking down upon
everybody. i couldn't bear her!"

"humph! this spawn of hers actually assumed to put herself on a level
with me, and to ‘approve' my opinions in regard to the children's
education! i was too provoked!"

"you'll always have trouble with her," said the lady. "the stock isn't
right. is agnes taking lessons in music?" she inquired, in a pause that
followed. the sound of a piano had for some time been heard.

mrs. dainty drew out her watch as she answered in the affirmative. she
saw that it was half-past twelve o'clock. a moment or two she listened,
while a serious expression came into her face.

"i don't like that," said she.

"what?"

"this girl is bound to have her way, i see!"

"who?"

"why, miss harper. there's been a contention between her and agnes
about the hour at which the music-lesson shall be given. agnes wished
to take it at ten o'clock; but miss harper said twelve. i told her two
hours ago to give agnes her lesson. but you see how it is! she means to
be mistress. i'm too provoked!"

"if she begins by domineering over your children in this way, what will
it be in the end? i only wonder that a girl like agnes would submit."

"it is the last music-lesson she gives in this house," said mrs.
dainty. "my mind is made up to that. send me the english lady, and i
will engage her on the spot. tell her that i would like her to come
this very day, if it is agreeable. i will send miss harper away, and
take her without consulting anybody. when the thing is done, uncle john
may scold to his heart's content. he can't change the fact."

and so the thing was settled. at dinner-time mrs. dainty maintained a
perfect silence in regard to the governess. agnes looked subdued. her
mother noticed this, and her blood grew hot as she imagined the cause
to be a crushed spirit under the iron rule of miss harper. uncle john
had made it his business to see a great deal more of what was going
on than any one imagined. he understood the state of agnes's mind far
better than did her mother. all was coming right, he saw, and his wise
heart, so full of interest for the children, felt a burden of care
removed. after dinner he went out.

"just what i wished for," said mrs. dainty to herself, as she saw him
take his hat and cane. "i will make clean work of it with this ‘angel'
of yours: see if i don't!"

"tell miss harper that i wish to see her in my room," mrs. dainty spoke
to a servant, half an hour later. the servant carried the message to
the governess, who obeyed the summons without a moment's delay.

"i have sent for you, miss harper, to say what you must have yourself
inferred,—that you will not suit me for a governess."

mrs. dainty spoke coldly,—almost severely. that florence was surprised,
her suddenly-heightened color showed plainly. she caught her breath,
and, for a few moments, looked bewildered. mrs. dainty observed this,
and said,—

"you have no reason to be surprised or disappointed, miss. i told
you in the beginning that i didn't think you would suit; and i have
never seen cause for a moment to change my mind since you came into
the house. instead of falling into your place and doing your duty as
became one in your position, you have done nothing but keep me and
the children in hot water from the day you entered the house. when
you get a good situation again, take my advice, and be content with a
hireling's place, and don't assume the airs of a mistress. no lady will
have her children domineered over as you have domineered over mine."

"mrs. dainty, i repel——"

"not a word to me, miss! not a word to me!" replied the lady,
imperiously. "i permit no one in my house to answer back. here are your
wages for the time you have been instructing the children. take the
money, and go!"

miss harper did not touch the money, but turned away, and was leaving
the room.

"miss harper!" the voice of mrs. dainty had in it a commanding tone.

florence paused, and turned partly around.

"why don't you take the money? say!"

"i cannot receive pay for services that are so poorly regarded," was
her calmly-spoken answer.

"impudent!" miss harper turned away again.

"stop!" the foot of mrs. dainty jarred on the floor. miss harper looked
back.

"don't see one of the children; but go off with yourself immediately!"

the young governess flitted away almost as noiselessly as a spirit. at
the same moment mrs. dainty rung her bell violently. to the servant who
answered, she said,—

"tell all the children to come to my room."

"they shall see who is mistress in this house." (so she talked with
herself in the interval.) "uncle john has had his way a little too
long. but there is a point beyond which patience ceases to be a virtue;
and i have arrived at that point."

"what do you want, mamma?" asked madeline, as she came with agnes and
her little brother into her mother's apartment.

"i want you to stay here with me," was the cold answer.

"can't i go back to miss harper? she was telling us such a sweet story
when you sent for her."

"no; you can't go back. you must stay here."

"i don't want to stay here. i'm going back to miss harper. i like her
better than anybody in this house." and little self-willed george made
for the door, in his determined way.

"you george! come back this instant!" cried his mother, in anger.

"a'n't a-going to," replied the little rebel.

"george!"

"a'n't a-going to!" sounded resolutely down from the stairs.

"i'll punish you!"

"don't care! miss harper! miss harper!"

almost like a fury did the mother rush away after her child. he heard
her coming, and ran to miss harper for protection. she had gone to her
own apartment: not seeing her in the study-room, the child knew where
to find her.

"go back to your mother, george!" said florence, speaking firmly, but
kindly, as the child rushed toward her.

"a'n't a-going to!"

"oh, yes; georgie must."

"no, no! a'n't a-going to!"

"this is the way you encourage disobedience in my children!" exclaimed
mrs. dainty, as she swept into the room at the moment when miss harper
was stooping down to kiss the little boy in the fulness of her swelling
love. "out of my house! and quickly!"

grasping george by an arm, she bore him, screaming, from the room; and,
as his cries came back to her from the distance, miss harper could hear
mingling with them the sound of passionate blows.

"poor children!" she said. "there is good in them, but how sadly
overgrown by weeds! with such a mother, what hope is there? but i must
not linger here. for their sakes i would have remained, even though
suffering insult daily. no choice is left me, however, and i must go."

as miss harper passed the door of mrs. dainty's room, on her way
down-stairs, dressed to leave the house, she heard the sobbing of
george and madeline, mingled with stormy words that were passing
between agnes and her mother. the purport of these she did not stop to
hear, but hurried on, and, without seeing or speaking to any one, took
her silent departure.

chapter vii.

a revelation.

"florence!" miss harper stopped suddenly, and looked up in a bewildered
manner.

"florence!" repeated the voice of uncle john.

"mr. fleetwood!" she could only utter the kind old man's name in a low,
choking voice.

"where are you going, florence?" he asked.

"home," was the answer.

"has any thing happened at home? is your aunt sick?"

"no, sir."

"are _you_ sick, florence?"

"yes, sir. sick at heart!" was the reply of florence, made with
quivering lips.

uncle john turned, and walked beside miss harper, in the direction he
had found her going.

"there is something wrong, florence," said he. "why have you left the
house of my niece so suddenly?"

"mrs. dainty has dispensed with my services."

"what?"

"mrs. dainty does not wish me any longer to hold the place of governess
to her children," said florence.

uncle john was silent for some moments. he then said,—

"how did this happen? tell me every thing freely."

florence related what had passed between her and mrs. dainty at the
hurried interview preceding her departure from the house.

"you must go back again," said uncle john, after florence had finished
her brief narrative.

"impossible!" was her firm answer.

"say not so, florence."

"impossible, mr. fleetwood! impossible! i am not strong enough to bear
all this insult and indignity. i can suffer pain, or even death; but my
spirit will not brook humiliation like this! only for the children's
sake have i remained up to this day."

"and only for their sakes would i still have you remain," said uncle
john.

"but the door is shut against me; and i will never knock to have it
opened," said the young girl, with an indignant spirit; "never! never!"
she repeated the words very firmly.

"the door must be opened for you, and without the preliminary of a
knock. leave all that to me," said uncle john.

by this time they had reached a small house in a part of the city where
persons in moderate circumstances reside, and both paused at the door.

"will you come in, mr. fleetwood?" said miss harper, speaking in a tone
of unusual familiarity. "aunt mary will, i know, be glad to see you."

"yes, i must go in, and have a little more talk with you, and a little
conference with good aunt mary."

in the next moment they passed together into the house,—the manner
of uncle john being that of a man who was entering a familiar place.
in the small, neatly-furnished sitting-room to which both proceeded
they found a plainly-dressed lady, somewhat advanced in years. she was
reading in a volume that seemed to have been taken up casually, as her
knitting-work was in her lap.

"how are you, mrs. elder?" said uncle john, in the familiar voice of a
friend; and he took the old lady's hand and shook it cordially.

"right well, and right glad to see you, mr. fleetwood," was the frank,
cheerful response, as she returned the hearty pressure of uncle john's
hand. "but to what cause am i indebted for this visit?" she added,
a slight shadow coming into her face as she looked more narrowly at
florence.

"a providential one, doubtless," said mr. fleetwood, smiling. "i
met your niece, just now, fleeing from the post of duty, and have
accompanied her hither, that i might hear the report she has to make of
herself."

"a good report, i doubt not," replied the old lady, throwing a kind but
serious glance upon the countenance of her niece.

"when the door is shut in your face, you can hardly be blamed for
leaving the threshold," said florence, with some bitterness in her
tones.

"is it so bad as that, my child?" mrs. elder spoke with much
tenderness, which did not wholly conceal a flush of indignation.

"just so bad." florence said this slowly, and with an emphasis on every
word. "just so bad," she repeated. "and yet mr. fleetwood wishes me to
return for the children's sake."

"and is not that a powerful motive?" said the old gentleman, speaking
before mrs. elder had time to reply. "for the children's sake! for the
sake of those little ones whom the lord, when upon the earth, took up
in his arms and blessed with a divine blessing,—who are so precious in
the eyes of heaven that their angels do always behold the face of our
father. i urged, you see, mrs. elder, no light motive."

the eyes and countenance of florence both drooped to the floor, and she
remained sitting almost motionless.

"i must know all the facts in the case, mr. fleetwood, before i can say
a word touching the duty of my niece. what she sees to be right she has
the courage to do, and, if my eyes can aid her in seeing right, i will
gladly lend her their more experienced vision. let me have the whole
story of this new trouble with mrs. dainty."

in as few words as possible, florence rehearsed what had passed between
her and mrs. dainty, giving to her auditors that lady's emphatic and
insulting terms of dismissal.

mrs. elder remained gravely silent for some minutes after florence
had ceased speaking; while mr. fleetwood waited patiently to get the
conclusion of her thoughts.

"i don't see that it is possible for florence to go back again," said
the old lady, speaking as if that view of the case were clearly settled
in her mind.

"extreme cases require extreme measures," said mr. fleetwood. "i treat
my niece, for most of the time, as if she were partially demented. and
so she is; for vanity and love of the world have in a measure dethroned
her reason. she was my favorite when a little girl; and i remained
strongly attached to her as she grew up toward womanhood,—though
i could not be over-patient with the fashionable follies to which
she showed far too early an inclination. for some years i have been
altogether out of heart with her, and see no hope of her reformation,
except through virtue of some great calamity. but she has children, to
whom all my love is transferred,—children who may be trained to good or
warped to evil. i had almost come to despair of them, when a bright day
renewed old acquaintanceship, and i discovered in your excellent niece
all the qualities needed to save these children. how wisely, lovingly,
and unselfishly she has performed her task so far i need not repeat to
you, mrs. elder, for i have told you every word before. and now, do you
think i can give her up? no, no. she must return. but i will make the
way as easy for her as possible. all the rough places i cannot hope to
make even; but she has courage to walk, if she knows the voice of duty,
even where sharp stones are certain to cut her tender feet. already
she has won her way into the hearts of the children, and has at this
moment more power over them for good than any living soul. this power
must not be lost."

"every child that is born," said aunt mary, in a thoughtful tone,
"is precious in the eyes of god, and his love toward that child is
manifested in the best possible arrangement of things external to its
life, in order that these may awaken in its heart emotions of kindness,
mercy, and pity toward others. such emotions, whenever excited, fix
themselves as permanent things in the young immortal, and remain there
like good seed that may be warmed into life and produce good fruit when
time has brought the age of rational freedom. it is by such remains of
good and true things in all their varieties, which are stored up in the
minds of children from the earliest days of infancy, up to manhood,
that our divine father is able to save us from the evil inclinations
we inherit, when we step forth, as men and women, self-reliant and
rationally responsible. to help in the work of storing up in the minds
of young children such ‘remains,' as i have called them, is indeed a
heavenly work; and all who engage in it are co-workers with angels."

"and to neglect such work," said mr. fleetwood, "when it lies in our
way, and will be performed by no other hands if we refuse to do it,
involves no light responsibility. the perversion, corruption, and final
ruin of an immortal soul is a fearful thought."

a deep sigh fluttered the bosom of florence harper; but she made no
remark.

"if a mother neglect her high duties in this regard," said mrs. elder,
"can we say that another becomes responsible in her stead?"

florence raised her head and listened with marked interest for mr.
fleetwood's answer to this question. he reflected a moment, and then
made reply:—

"for the work god sets before us are we alone responsible. his love
for his children is so great that he is ever providing the means to
help them to a knowledge of the good that is needful to secure their
happiness. if those appointed by nature to do good to his little ones
neglect their high trust, he leads others to a knowledge of their
wants; and, if these pass by unmoved to kindness, he still offers the
heavenly work to other hands."

the head of florence again drooped, and again her bosom trembled with a
sigh.

"i do not ask florence to return to our house to-day," said mr.
fleetwood. "she must have a little time for rest and reflection, and i
must have a little time for observation and management at home. the
meaning of this hasty step on the part of my niece i do not comprehend.
something lies behind it that i must make out clearly before acting."

"i will see you in the morning, florence," added the old gentleman, on
rising to go. then, taking her hand, he said, very earnestly, and with
slight emotion,—

"ever regard me as your friend,—nay, more than a friend,—as a father.
do not fear that i will advise you to any course of action in this
matter that i would not advise you to take were you indeed my own
child—as—as you might have been!"

the voice of the old man grew strangely veiled with feeling as he
uttered, in something of an absent way, the closing words of the last
sentence.

"yes! yes! as you might have been, florence!" repeated mr. fleetwood,
with sudden energy, catching at the hand of the young girl and pressing
it to his lips.

"tell her all! yes, tell her all!" he added, turning to mrs. elder in a
hurried, excited manner. "her presence moves me strangely, and memories
of the past are too strong for an old man's feelings."

mr. fleetwood left, abruptly, the apartment, passing into the street,
and so leaving the aunt and niece alone.

"tell me all of what, aunt mary?" said florence, coming to the side of
mrs. elder. her face had become very pale.

"a simple story of thwarted love and undying affection," replied aunt
mary, calmly. "mr. fleetwood loved your mother, and that love was only
in a measure returned. your father won her heart more truly, and she
decided in his favor. they were married, and you are their only child.
if your mother had married mr. fleetwood, the current of her life might
have run smoother; but whether she would have been happier is not for
me to say. mr. fleetwood never would marry again; and it seems that his
love for your mother has been an undying passion. i will say no more
than this. but he is a man of great moral worth, noble sentiments, and
a true heart. his interest in you is not a passing whim or preference,
but has in it such deep regard as a wise and good father knows only for
his child. and so you may be very sure that he will advise you to no
course of action in regard to his niece and her children that he would
not advise for his own daughter. it was his love for these children
that led him to desire you for their governess,— you, whom he rightly
knew only through my representation of your character. i think you will
see it best to return to your post."

"i can only go back through mrs. dainty's invitation, and, i was going
to say, after her apology."

"withhold for the present that last condition," said aunt mary. "i
doubt not, when the time comes, the way in which your feet should walk
will be made very plain."

chapter viii.

the new governess.

mrs. dainty was asleep in her easy-chair, and the children, with no
governess to interest or instruct them, were ranging through the house
at will, and finding their own amusements, when the educated english
lady arrived, and sent up her card.

"mrs. jeckyl—jeckyl: who is she? i have no acquaintance by that name,"
said mrs. dainty, as she looked at the card through her half-awake
eyes. "what kind of a person is she?"

"she's dressed in black," replied the waiter.

"have you ever seen her before?" inquired mrs. dainty.

"no, ma'am."

"is she genteel-looking? has she the appearance of a lady?"

"she walks like a lady," replied the discriminating waiter; "but her
black is a little rusty."

"somebody that wants charity, i suppose," said mrs. dainty, with a look
of disgust and an impatient toss of the head. "go down and say that i
am engaged, but that she can send me word as to her business."

the waiter retired. on coming back he said,—

"the woman wouldn't tell me her business. she says she was desired to
call by mrs. ashton, but that, if you are not prepared to see her, it
is of no consequence."

"mrs. ashton! oh, yes; now i understand! has she gone?"

the manner of mrs. dainty changed suddenly; and she made the inquiry
with manifest eagerness.

"she acted as if she were going," replied the waiter.

"go back quickly, and say that i will be down in a moment."

a gleam of satisfaction shot across the face of mrs. dainty.

"my new english governess!" she ejaculated, in a low tone, as the
waiter left the room. "i'll soon have a new order of things with the
children!"

after slightly adjusting her dress, which had become disarranged
during her sleep in the easy-chair, mrs. dainty put on as grave an air
of dignity as she could assume, and went down to the parlor. as she
entered, a tall woman dressed in black arose, and stood, awaiting her
approach, with a half proud, half deferential air, fixing upon her at
the same time two small, gray, piercing eyes, that seemed to go right
through mrs. dainty. her widow's weeds, as the waiter had informed
his mistress, were a little rusty; and the same might be said of her
complexion. her nose was rather a marked feature for prominence and
size; her lips were delicate in comparison with the rest of her face,
and had a certain flexibility which showed them to be quick indicators
of feeling. the whole aspect of the face made upon mrs. dainty, at the
first glance, rather an unfavorable impression; and she seemed to be
pushed from rather than drawn toward the woman.

"mrs. jeckyl?" she said, assuming a frank, smiling courtesy, as she
came forward and offered her hand.

"my name." and the visitor bowed with a reserved dignity, giving only
the tips of her fingers to mrs. dainty.

"mrs. ashton desired you to call?"

"yes, ma'am. she said you were about changing your governess, and would
like to see me on the subject."

the woman's manner a little embarrassed mrs. dainty: there was in it an
air of conscious superiority that rather overawed her.

"i have dismissed an upstart american girl, who took on airs with both
me and my children," replied mrs. dainty, with considerable warmth.

"american girls, i have observed," said the visitor, "are apt to forget
themselves in the respect you mention. it grows naturally out of your
system of government, i presume. this equality of the people must often
show itself as an offensive element in society. i have been many times
annoyed by it since i came to america."

"oh, it's dreadful!" replied mrs. dainty. "dreadful!"

"like other evils," was replied, "it will, i suppose, cure itself in
time. people who can afford to be independent will throw off the rude
familiars who thrust themselves too far in advance of their right
positions."

"exactly so, as i have done in the case of miss harper, whom i sent off
without a moment's warning, for the offence of presumption. she very
foolishly imagined that her judgment and her will touching the children
were superior to mine, and ventured to set me at naught in their eyes.
it was a bold experiment on her part, and proved, of course, a failure."

"if all american ladies would act with a like decision of character,"
said mrs. jeckyl, "a needed reform would take place much sooner than it
is likely to occur while things go on as at present. but to the purpose
of my visit. you desire, as i understand, to secure the services of a
competent governess for your children."

"i do," replied mrs. dainty.

"so i have been informed; and i have called to see you at the
particular request of mrs. ashton. i do not know that i am prepared
to make a positive engagement at present, however. the position will
be new to me; and i feel averse to assuming it. having moved all my
life in the best english society, i find it hard to repress a natural
repugnance to becoming a mere employee—a kind of half servant—in an
american family."

"i am not surprised at the feeling," said mrs. dainty, whose respect
for the lady had mounted at least thirty degrees on the scale of
estimation. "it would be strange if you felt differently. but i think
we can make your position in our family wholly agreeable. at least, it
shall not be my fault if there is any failure."

"if the lady herself is on my side——" mrs. jeckyl paused.

"you need not be troubled for the rest," said mrs. dainty, finishing
the sentence.

"very truly said," was remarked, in a compliant, insinuating manner.

the two ladies then came down to a regular business interview, in which
the questions of service and compensation were fully discussed. the
terms of the applicant were high, and her stipulations varied. she was
to have no care of the children beyond their education. mrs. dainty
must have a nurse to give all attention to their bodily wants, while
she administered solely to their mental needs. the hours of study
must be fixed, and the nurse produce the children at the study-room
doors precisely at the time specified. with the termination of the
study-hours, all demands upon the governess for service in the family
must end. after that her time must be her own. as to her meals, they
must be sent to her room, and she must have the privilege of ordering
as she desired from the day's bill of fare. all this was imperative,
and all this mrs. dainty yielded, so earnest was she in her desire to
secure the services of this accomplished english lady.

"there is one thing of which i must advise you," said mrs. dainty,
during the interview. "we have residing with us a bachelor uncle of
mine, who, being in no business, amuses himself by petty interferences
in our family concerns. he is a terrible annoyance sometimes. i mention
this in the beginning, that you may be prepared for him. one of the
reasons why i sent off that american girl was, because he took her side
in every thing, and encouraged her in all her airs and assumptions."

"he must keep out of my way." there was a peculiar lifting of mrs.
jeckyl's upper lip as she said this,—as we sometimes see it in an angry
beast,—just showing her teeth enough to make it evident that she had
the power to bite, and the will, too under sufficient provocation. the
effect on mrs. dainty was not pleasant; but she waved aside the warning
impression as something in which there was no meaning.

"hold him entirely aloof," she said. "do not permit his interference in
the smallest matter."

"what right has he to interfere?" mrs. jeckyl showed a measure of
womanly indignation.

"none!" was answered, with warmth. "none! i consider myself competent
to decide in all questions touching the management of my own children,
and his meddlesome interference puts me out of all patience. we must
lay our heads together to circumvent him entirely."

"why circumvent?" said mrs. jeckyl. "why take all that trouble? isn't
there an easier and plainer way?"

"i do not wish seriously to offend my uncle," replied mrs. dainty,
slightly depressing her tone. "he is an excellent, well-meaning,
kind-hearted man. i would therefore circumvent rather than harshly
oppose him. he is rather quick-tempered, and an open rupture might
ensue. the best way for you will be to keep him entirely at a distance.
stand wholly on your dignity. do not respond to any suggestion or
advice that he may offer in regard to the children, but keep your own
counsel and carry out your own views."

"trust me for that," said mrs. jeckyl. "he will always find me rock or
india-rubber."

"when will you come?" asked mrs. dainty, as this preliminary interview
was about closing.

"as early as you desire," replied the educated english lady.
"to-morrow, if it is agreeable."

"i wish you would say this afternoon."

"this afternoon!" mrs. jeckyl opened her small gray eyes wider than
usual.

"i have a particular reason," said mrs. dainty.

"if it is very particular." there was a yielding air about mrs. jeckyl.

"it is,—_very_ particular. i will explain. uncle john knows nothing at
all yet about my break with miss harper, and still thinks her in the
house. her services were obtained through him, and he seems to regard
her as a kind of _protégé_. now, in order to let him understand that i
am entirely in earnest, and that her return is impossible, i wish him
to learn two facts in the case at the same time,—that the old governess
has left the house, and that a new one has entered. this will prevent
a brief but unpleasant struggle for the mastery. you understand me?"

"certainly."

"and will remain?"

mrs. jeckyl reflected for some time.

"i see exactly what you wish to accomplish," she said, "and sympathize
with you entirely. to-morrow would suit me better; yet troublesome
difficulties may pile themselves up between this and to-morrow."

"an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure," remarked mrs. dainty.

"it is, as every one has proved a hundred times in life," said the new
governess.

"it will be wise for us, then, to use the ounce of prevention."

"it will," replied mrs. jeckyl.

"then you will at once assume your new duties in my family?"

"yes."

"i am delighted at your compliance!" said mrs. dainty, pleased as an
impulsive child in gaining some desired object. "we shall soon have a
new order of things that will defy uncle john's petty interference.
come with me, and i will take you to your room and then introduce you
to my children."

chapter ix.

the shadow of evil.

showing the room was a simple affair, but when it came to showing up
the children the matter assumed rather a complicated aspect. agnes was
the first whom mrs. dainty ventured to introduce to the new governess.

"my oldest daughter, mrs. jeckyl," she said, as agnes, who had been
summoned to the study-room, entered with a grave, half-wondering,
perceptibly-clouded face. "agnes, mrs. jeckyl, our new governess, who
takes the place of miss harper."

agnes, who had advanced to within a few steps of her mother and mrs.
jeckyl, stopped suddenly. the quicker-flowing blood dyed her face to a
deep crimson. the tall, repulsive-looking englishwoman—repulsive to the
sight of agnes—advanced a step and offered her hand; but, instead of
taking the extended hand, agnes merely returned her sharp penetrating
look, with one half fearful and half repugnant.

"why don't you speak to the lady?" said mrs. dainty, with some
sharpness of tone.

agnes partially extended her hand, and mrs. jeckyl, changing her
dignified look to one of smiling insinuation, accepted the reluctant
courtesy.

"sit down, my dear." mrs. dainty's manner changed, and her voice
assumed its pleasantest tones.

the three then sat down, facing each other, but neither of them at ease.

"mrs. jeckyl," said the mother, "has come to take the place of miss
harper as your governess. she is an accomplished english lady, and will
be very kind to you. i shall expect you to submit yourselves to her
dutifully, and to be guided by her instructions. you are the oldest, my
daughter, and your example to madeline and george will be all-potent.
as you lead, they will follow. lead them kindly, then, into obedience
and acquiescence. it is in your power to make this change an easy one
for all parties. confide in mrs. jeckyl. you will find her worthy of
all confidence."

"believe me, my dear child," (mrs. jeckyl took up the theme in a
peculiarly insinuating voice, and with a smile that obliterated nearly
every disagreeable feature in her countenance,) "that i am indeed your
friend. i do not come here as a harsh, exacting tyrant, but as a
sympathizing instructor. i shall not be over-exacting, though earnest
in seeking your improvement. do not fear that i will require you to run
where only the skill to walk is possessed. let us be friends in the
beginning."

and she seized the hand of agnes and gave it a warm pressure.

mrs. dainty was delighted at this; it was so different from the cold,
unbending manner of florence harper. she saw in it the polished
complaisance of a superior, educated woman, in contrast with the
weak, upstart pretensions of a presuming american girl elevated by
circumstances into a position of authority.

but agnes was not to be won over so easily. young eyes often see deeper
at the first glance than old ones. the hand taken by mrs. jeckyl gave
no returning pressure. mrs. dainty was chafed at this, and said, with
some impatience of manner, yet in a low tone, meant only for the ears
of her daughter,—

"this is unladylike! try and show a little breeding."

"oh, never fear, madam," spoke out, in a free way, the new governess,
who had heard the admonition: "we will be good friends enough. your
daughter must have time to make my acquaintance. first impressions are
rarely continued. she will find me considerate, just, and sympathizing.
i have been young, and can well remember the days of girlhood. indeed,
the child in me is not all extinguished yet. i like your daughter's
face, and see in it the index of a mind to which judicious culture will
give strength and beauty."

"thank you for the prophecy," said mrs. dainty, highly pleased with
this well-timed remark. "i have seen that agnes possessed more
than ordinary endowments, and that all she wanted was a judicious
instructor, who could be at the same time a wise and loving friend. be
that to her, mrs. jeckyl, and you will have our everlasting gratitude."

"trust me, madam, that i will seek the highest good of your children in
all things," was replied in a manner that was meant to be impressive,
but which so thinly veiled the hypocrite that agnes, whose eyes were
upon the woman's face, curled her lip in almost involuntary contempt.

"call george and madeline," said mrs. dainty, but little encouraged by
agnes's reception of the governess, and anxious to get matters settled
between this latter personage and the children as quickly as possible.

agnes left the room, and soon returned with her brother and sister.
madeline entered with a demure face, and shy, timid air; while george
bounded in, boy-like, shouting at the top of his voice.

"george!" mrs. dainty held up her finger in a warning way.

george checked his rude manner, and stood with his large eyes fixed
curiously upon the face of mrs. jeckyl, who tried to put on a most
winning countenance. but, so far as the boy was concerned, her effort
was entirely fruitless. to him her aspect was wholly repulsive.

"what old woman is this, mamma?" he asked, looking from mrs. jeckyl to
his mother.

"why, george! george! hush! what do you mean? where are your manners?"
and the face of mrs. dainty crimsoned.

"you see, mrs. jeckyl," she said, trying to apologize for the child's
rudeness, "how our children ape the coarse manners of these vulgar
american domestics. miss harper, the governess whom i have just
dismissed, has left her mark behind her, as you see; and a very ugly
mark it is."

"she isn't ugly at all!" exclaimed george, by no means comprehending
the drift of his mother's remark, but understanding clearly enough that
miss harper was the subject of disparaging words. "she's beautiful, and
i love her. i do!"

"madeline dear,"—mrs. dainty turned from george, over whom she had but
little influence, and spoke very pleasantly,—"let me present you to
mrs. jeckyl, who is to be your governess in the place of miss harper."

but the child, instead of advancing toward mrs. jeckyl, stepped back
slowly,—as if the woman's eyes were two broad, strong hands, pushing
her away,—receding until she stood against the wall.

"madeline! come here this moment! what do you mean?" mrs. dainty spoke
sharply.

the child now moved, sideling, along the wall, keeping her gaze fixed,
as by a kind of fascination, upon mrs. jeckyl, until she came opposite
lo where her mother was sitting. then, not withdrawing her eyes for an
instant from the strange woman's face, she came forward and stood by
her mother's side.

"this is my second daughter, madeline," said mrs. dainty, pushing the
child toward mrs. jeckyl.

"how are you, my dear?" mrs. jeckyl, seeming not to observe the intense
repugnance of the child, reached out a hand, and, taking hold of
madeline, drew her almost forcibly to her side.

"what a nice little girl!" she said, holding her tightly in one hand,
and smoothing her hair with the other. "what sweet curls! where did you
get them, dear?"

but madeline, with a flushed, half-frightened face, tried to release
herself from the woman's firm grip.

"what dear children you have!" said mrs. jeckyl, now insinuating an
arm around madeline, and continuing to smooth her hair with gentle but
regularly-repeated passes. "we shall be the best of friends in a little
while. i shall love them very much."

once or twice madeline, over whose face rapid changes were passing,
(at one moment it was deeply flushed, and at the next overspread by
a strange pallor,) made a spring in the effort to release herself.
but the hand of mrs. jeckyl, that was upon her arm, tightened to a
vice-like grasp, while the other intermitted not for an instant its
regular motions, just above, or slightly touching, her hair.

"we shall be very good friends, madam,—the best of friends. i always
attach children strongly." mrs. jeckyl spoke confidently, and like one
wholly at her ease.

at this moment mrs. dainty became oppressed with a feeling of vague
terror, united with an almost intolerable repugnance toward mrs.
jeckyl; and it was with an effort that she overcame the impulse to
spring forward and snatch madeline from her investing arm. a little
while she struggled weakly against this strange feeling; then it
passed slowly away, and, like one awakening from a dream, she found
the current of her life moving on once more in its regular channels.
but she had a different impression of mrs. jeckyl, and a new feeling
toward her. it seemed as if they had been suddenly removed from each
other, and to so great a distance that immediate contact was forever
impossible. she was about suggesting that it might be as well for mrs.
jeckyl to defer until the next day her formal entrance into the family,
when she observed a change in madeline, who, instead of endeavoring
to get away from the new governess, now leaned against her, although
the hand that held her a little while before was no longer closed upon
her arm. almost at the moment of noticing this, mrs. jeckyl raised the
unresisting child to her lap, who leaned her head back against her, and
gazed up into her face with a pleased, confiding, almost affectionate,
look.

"i said we would be good friends." mrs. jeckyl glanced with an exultant
smile toward mrs. dainty. "i understand the art of attaching children.
what a dear, sweet child this is! i promise myself a world of pleasure
in entering into her pure young mind and storing it with lessons of
wisdom. and your oldest daughter——"

mrs. jeckyl turned her glittering eyes—that seemed to have in them a
charmed power—upon agnes.

for a moment or two the young girl was retained by them, as if a spell
were on her: then she turned away and fled from the room, her whole
being pervaded by a strange sense of fear.

not in the smallest degree did mrs. jeckyl seem to be disconcerted at
this.

"young people have curious fancies," she said, in an even voice. "i
am used to them, and know how to adapt myself to all these variant
peculiarities. give yourself no further trouble about my position with
your children. i will manage all that. leave me now with madeline and
george. i want to make their better acquaintance. come, georgie dear; i
have in my pocket the funniest little box, with the funniest little man
in it, you ever saw in your life."

the funny little box, and the funny little man, won over the romping
boy, and he went to the side of mrs. jeckyl without a moment's
hesitation.

it was as much as mrs. dainty could do to tear herself from the
apartment and leave her two little children alone with this woman.
she felt a vague sense of evil. a shadow, as from the wing of danger,
seemed to have fallen upon her spirit. but mrs. jeckyl asked to be
alone with them, and she felt that she must retire.

chapter x.

a little breeze.

"who is that old woman i met on the stairs just now?" inquired mr.
fleetwood, late in the afternoon of the day made memorable by the
entrance of mrs. jeckyl into the dainty family.

"it is our new governess," replied agnes, to whom the question was
addressed. a look of disgust marred her face as she spoke.

"your new governess!" exclaimed uncle john, in amazement. "when did she
come, and where from?"

"she came two hours ago; but whether she dropped from the clouds, or
was dug out of the earth, is more than i can tell. she's horrible! i
don't know what's come over mother!"

"who is she? what is her name?"

"a wicked-looking old woman, whom mother calls an accomplished english
lady. her name is jeckyl."

"jeckyl? jeckyl?" uncle john shook his head. "never heard of her
before."

"nor anybody else but mother. and where she found her, the dear only
knows!"

"why was florence harper sent away?"

a sad expression came into the face of agnes, as she replied,—

"my fault, i suppose. in my blind self-will, i resisted her when she
was right and i was wrong; and i complained of her unjustly. mother
talked very roughly to her,—she's always done that; and then—and then,
i believe, miss harper went away."

"miss harper was a kind, good girl," said uncle john, "and tried always
to do what was right. i am sorry you misunderstood or resisted her, for
she was the best friend you will ever find in a governess."

"i know she was, uncle; and i have learned it just too late. oh, i
would give any thing in the world to have her back again."

"i must see your mother at once," said uncle john. "where is she?"

"in her own room."

"will you say that i want her?"

agnes went to her mother's room.

"uncle john wishes to see you," said she.

"what does he want to see me about?" asked mrs. dainty.

"i don't know. he's waiting for you over in the sitting-room."

"tell him i'm engaged just now."

but that reply didn't suit uncle john at all. his niece had no business
to be engaged, to him!

"what is she doing?" he inquired of agnes.

"reading."

"ah, well! if she can't come to me, i can, at least, go to her." and
uncle john left the sitting-room. mrs. dainty started and looked
confused as mr. fleetwood entered her chamber.

"very particularly engaged?" said the old gentleman, a little
sarcastically.

"i didn't imagine that your business was one of life and death!"
retorted mrs. dainty, with heightening color.

"and yet it may be, for all your defect of imagination," said the old
man, seating himself with the air of one who had something on his mind.

"where is florence harper?"

"that is a question not in my power to answer," replied mrs. dainty.
"she left here some hours ago."

"why did she leave?"

"i sent her away."

"for what cause?"

"she did not suit me."

"in what respect?"

"in all respects."

"a sweeping range of objections, truly. may i ask another question?"

"forty, if you like."

"who is that old woman i met on the stairs a little while ago?"

"old woman! i've seen no _old woman_." mrs. dainty emphasized the last
words.

"a middle-aged woman, then, with a hard—almost wicked—face. she was
dressed in black."

"our new governess, probably," said mrs. dainty.

"that old hag your new governess!" uncle john felt outraged, and spoke
intemperately.

"i beg of you not to use such language, uncle john." mrs. dainty
affected calmness, and spoke in a tone of quiet rebuke. "the person to
whom you refer is an accomplished english lady, whose husband—a man of
rank, i believe—died in the east india company's service."

"poh! a cast-off, superannuated lady's maid, more like!" retorted uncle
john, with overflowing indignation.

"this is insufferable!" exclaimed mrs. dainty, losing temper.

"what is insufferable?"

it was uncle john's turn to assume an exterior calmness.

"your unwarrantable interference in our family concerns! it has come
to a pretty pass when i cannot even buy a beefsteak, or turn off a
disorderly domestic, but you must interfere in the matter and volunteer
an ignorant condemnation. to tell you the plain truth, uncle john, i am
getting very tired of this, and wish it to end. i didn't consult you
about this affair, because i didn't think it one in which you had any
rights or interest."

"indeed! you ignore my interests quite summarily. pray, did you consult
your husband?" inquired mr. fleetwood.

"no, i did not!" was replied. "there was no occasion to worry his mind
on the subject."

"probably you thought he had no more right in the case than your
troublesome old uncle," said mr. fleetwood, sarcastically.

"whether he had or not doesn't signify in the present controversy,"
replied mrs. dainty, still showing a great deal of angry excitement. "i
chose to send away an offensive, upstart american girl, who didn't know
her place, and who kept the children by the ears half of the time, and
take in her stead an accomplished, middle-aged lady, with years and
experience on her side. i have no question in regard to my husband's
acquiescence, and therefore shall not permit you to hector me on the
subject. so pray, uncle john, spare me any further annoyance! it will
only tend to produce, in both of us, states of unkindness."

"where so much is at stake, i must venture much," said mr. fleetwood.
"i pray you, in turn, be not offended, if i press you on this subject.
the love i bear for you and these children will not let me keep
silence. you have strangely misapprehended florence harper. she——"

"uncle john!" mrs. dainty interrupted the old gentleman, "i have shut
the door against her: so let her name die in this house. i shall not
consent to canvass with you either her good or evil qualities. i know
just as much of her as i ever care to know."

"what do you know of this mrs. jeckyl, to whom, in such mad haste, you
have given over the care of your children? an accomplished english
lady? is that the extent of your knowledge? did you ever hear of her
before to-day?"

"go on, uncle john! go on! i will try to be patient!" said mrs.
dainty, leaning back in her chair and forcing to her lips a smile of
resignation.

"a fig for your patience! answer me in reason!" retorted the old
gentleman.

"i will when i make you my father confessor; but not before. i have no
need at present for such a ghostly appendage."

in this spirit the controversy went on for more than half an hour, no
advantage whatever being gained by uncle john. mrs. dainty said that
she had tried a governess of his selection, and tried her faithfully;
and now she was going to try one of her own choosing, and, if he talked
until doomsday, it would not, in the smallest degree, affect her
purposes in the case.

most reluctantly did mr. fleetwood consent to abandon the argument. he
felt that too much was at stake. but a woman's will in the case was
altogether too strong for him. mrs. dainty had made up her mind to have
her own way, and all remonstrance, argument, and persuasion went with
her for nothing.

chapter xi.

the demon unveiled.

"such a scene as i have had with that meddlesome old uncle of mine!"
said mrs. dainty to mrs. jeckyl. the two ladies met in the room of the
latter, whither mrs. dainty repaired as soon as mr. fleetwood, hopeless
of gaining any influence over her, had retired, discomfited, from the
field of controversy.

"on what subject?" inquired the new governess.

"oh, about you!" said mrs. dainty.

"about me? what about me?" the small, gray eyes of mrs. jeckyl
lightened.

"i told you that miss harper, that abominable girl i sent off to-day,
was a pet of his."

"ah, yes; i remember. well, there's one thing very certain, madam:
he'll find no pet or plaything in me!" there was the look of an ogre
in the woman's skinny face. "i met him on the stairs an hour ago: one
glance told me his character. i read him like a book."

"how did you read him?" asked mrs. dainty.

"he's an old cot-betty! a thing i despise!" said mrs. jeckyl, with
contempt.

"he's kind-hearted." mrs. dainty uttered a word of apology for uncle
john. it came from her lips almost unbidden.

"kind-hearted! any fool may be kind-hearted," said mrs. jeckyl, "and
yet be very annoying in his folly. i never had much fancy for what are
called kind-hearted people by way of apology for a thousand annoying
vices and defects of character."

"uncle john has few defects of character, and no vices." mrs. dainty
could not help this just defence of her excellent relative.

"by your own showing, madam," said mrs. jeckyl, affecting a pleasant
tone, "he is very much inclined to be meddlesome in your affairs: that
i call a vice. if you think the appellation too severe, you can call
the peculiarity by another name. i can't tolerate such men!"

"i don't ask your toleration of him. only avoid, if possible, giving
offence. for my mother's sake, if not for his own, i must bear with him
and treat him with all considerate kindness."

"i'll manage him," said mrs. jeckyl. "so don't give yourself any
trouble about his interference with my duties or privileges in the
house."

there was considerable modification in the tone and manner of mrs.
jeckyl. she saw that she had shown her rough side a little too plainly,
and that there were reasons why mrs. dainty could not ignore uncle john
altogether.

"you must bear as kindly as possible with his peculiarities. he
means well," said mrs. dainty, as a very feeling sense of her many
obligations to uncle john, past, present, and to come, grew distinct in
her mind.

"he won't trouble me any." mrs. jeckyl smiled in a lamb-like way,—or,
rather, tried so to smile. but the effort was one so unusual to her
that she failed in the result; and mrs. dainty was in some doubt as to
the meaning of the curious expression that came into the woman's face.
she had visited the room of mrs. jeckyl for the purpose of having a
very free talk about uncle john, and also for the purpose of settling
with that lady some very decided plans of operation in regard to him.
but the spirit in which mrs. jeckyl showed herself disposed to act
rather cooled her ardor, and set her to thinking in a new direction.

the conference closed almost abruptly, and little to the satisfaction
of either party. mrs. dainty more than half repented of her hasty
action in taking this strange woman into the house and giving over
her children to a guardianship and an influence that might be for
evil instead of good. when her husband questioned her, she put as bold
a face upon the matter as was possible,—denouncing miss harper in
unmeasured terms, and extolling the educated, accomplished english lady
whom she had been so fortunate as to secure in her place.

"it is best, sometimes, to let well-enough alone," said mr. dainty,
on learning from his wife the change she had seen proper to make in a
matter of so much importance. "and i think miss harper was at least
well enough."

this was all he remarked, and mrs. dainty saw it best to leave the
matter, so far as he was concerned, just there. his easy indifference
left her generally free to do about as she pleased: so, whenever he
failed of prompt acquiescence in any course she designed to take, she
pursued the easy policy of not disturbing his mind on the subject.

"oh, she's hateful! i'll get a gun and shoot her!" it was little
george who thus freely expressed his indignant appreciation of the new
governess. he was talking to madeline; and they were near enough to
their mother's door to be heard distinctly.

"i wish miss harper was back again," said madeline. her voice had a
mournful sound in the ears of mrs. dainty. "i loved her so."

"miss harper was good, but this old woman is hateful. what made you
sit in her lap and lean your head against her?"

"i don't know. i couldn't help it," replied madeline, still speaking
in a kind of plaintive way. "i wish mother would send her out of the
house. i'm afraid of her."

"i'm not afraid of her!" spoke out little george, boldly. "and i don't
mean to say a single lesson."

"that won't be right," said madeline. "she is our teacher, you know."

"she isn't my teacher if i don't choose; and i don't choose," responded
young america. "i'll say my lessons to miss harper; and i won't say
them to anybody else."

"madeline dear!" it was a new voice among the interlocutors, and the
tones send a strange thrill among the nerves of mrs. dainty.

all was silent for some moments. the presence of the new-comer seemed
to have thrown a spell over the children.

"come, dear; i want to show you something beautiful i have in my room."

mrs. dainty sat breathlessly still, listening. there was the sound as
of a child rising slowly from the floor.

"come, george." it was the same voice.

"a'n't a-going to!" was the quick, sturdy reply.

"yes, george; come. i've got some beautiful things up in my room."

"don't go, madeline!" said george. "she's got a snake up there, and
it'll bite you! i saw it as i passed her door!"

"you wicked little wretch!" exclaimed mrs. jeckyl, thrown for a moment
off her guard. "how dare you utter such a falsehood?"

"mother!" it was the voice of madeline, and its low tones came to mrs.
dainty's ears with such an appealing fear in them that she repressed
only by a strong effort an impulse to rush forth into the passage and
catch the child up in her arms. but she sat still and listened.

"don't go, maddy!" persisted george, nothing daunted. "she _has_ got a
snake there. i saw it."

a wild cry of fear now broke from the lips of madeline, that went
thrilling through the house. mrs. dainty sprung from her room and
caught the child from mrs. jeckyl's grasp. as she did so, madeline
shrunk against and clung to her, while her whole frame quivered as you
have felt a bird quiver in your hand.

"what ails you, dear?" mrs. dainty laid her face down upon the child's
face, and spoke very tenderly.

"it's that wicked little boy of yours," said mrs. jeckyl, "who has
been frightening her with the story of a snake in my room. how dare you
do so, sir?"

"well, so you have!" persisted little don't care. "i saw it. there it
is now, in your bosom! see! if its head isn't peeping out alongside of
your neck!"

it was now mrs. jeckyl's turn to start and look frightened. so natural
and earnest was the boy's tones, that even she was for a moment
deceived, and clutched convulsively at the imaginary snake.

"too bad!" she exclaimed, recovering herself. "too bad!"

others soon joined the little group at the door of mrs. dainty's
chamber; for the cry of madeline had reached every ear in the dwelling.
among the first to arrive was uncle john.

"she did it!" cried george, pointing to mrs. jeckyl. "she did it!"

"did what?" asked uncle john.

"frightened maddy! she's got a snake in her bosom! take care!"

"a snake!" uncle john looked puzzled.

"i saw it in her room; and she's got it in her bosom now," persisted
the little fellow, quite delighted in observing the storm he had
raised, and more delighted at the discomfiture of the enemy.

"you wicked little wretch!" exclaimed mrs. jeckyl, advancing toward the
boy.

george glided behind uncle john, and, peering out from his place of
refuge, made a new attack.

"they're in her eyes now! don't let her come near you, sister aggy!
take care, papa! _old snake!_ she's the mother of snakes! see! they're
crawling all over her!"

a tiger about to spring upon his victim could not have glared with two
more cruel eyes than those that sought the form of little george.

"silence!" cried mr. dainty, who had joined the excited company.
"silence!" he repeated, sternly, as george attempted to speak again.
"what does all this mean?"

"it simply means," said mrs. jeckyl, with forced composure, "that this
little boy of yours has frightened his sister with an improbable story
of a snake in my room. he seems to have a fruitful imagination, as he
now multiplies the snake by a score, and covers my body with them."

uncle john now observed madeline, who stood with her face hidden upon
her mother's bosom, and shrinking very closely to her, turn her head
slowly and look at mrs. jeckyl. her countenance was pale, and her eyes
had a strange—almost terrified—expression. she gave only a single
glance, and then hid her face again, while a low shudder was seen
pervading her body.

"it is plain," said uncle john, taking advantage of the singular state
of affairs presented, and addressing the new governess, "that your
efforts to gain influence over these children have been unsuccessful,
and that, judging from the present state of affairs, such efforts in
the future will be hopeless. my advice to you, therefore, is to retire
immediately."

"i have no knowledge of you, sir, in the case," replied mrs. jeckyl,
growing at once self-possessed, and speaking with dignity. "i am here,
under regular engagement with mrs. dainty, to perform a service to her
children, for which i hold myself entirely competent, and to recede
from which under the reaction of simple child's-play like this i am not
in the least inclined. am i covered with snakes, sir?"

"not literally," replied uncle john.

"not literally! what am i to understand, sir, by your words?"

"simply the meaning they convey to your mind. nothing more."

"are there snakes in my eyes?" the woman was losing her forced
composure.

"say yes, uncle john! say yes!" spoke out little george.

"if you look into a mirror, you can see for yourself," replied the
old gentleman, who, now that he had come fairly into conflict with the
stranger, determined to adopt any mode of warfare that would drive her
from the house. "i don't wonder that you frightened madeline."

"uncle john!" mrs. dainty now made a feeble effort to speak in favor of
her new governess. "this is insufferable! am i to have no control in my
own house? are people to be insulted——"

"oh, mother! mother! send her away!"

it was madeline who interrupted mrs. dainty, as she lifted her face
with a look of such pleading fear that it checked her utterance. and
the shudder that thrilled the child's frame was so strong that it sent
the blood coldly to her mother's heart.

"madam!" (mr. dainty now assumed the controlling power, and spoke to
mrs. jeckyl like a man who was in earnest,) "after this scene you
cannot remain here in any comfort to yourself, nor in any acceptance
in our family. i beg you, therefore, to retire from the house, and at
once."

"sir——" mrs. jeckyl made an effort to reply, but mr. dainty would have
no parley with her. "madeline," he said, laying his hand upon his wife
and speaking very firmly, "go into your room with maddy and george; and
you, agnes, leave us."

there was no hesitation on the part of any thus addressed, for all,
except george, were more than glad to get out of the presence of mrs.
jeckyl. he,—little rebel!—as he went at his father's bidding, looked
back over his shoulder, and called out,—

"snakes! snakes!"

as soon as mrs. jeckyl was alone with mr. dainty and uncle john, and
found herself without any chance of holding the place she was in
reality particularly desirous to retain, she gave full course to her
indignant feelings, and for some minutes poured forth a torrent of
mad invective. not a single word was said in reply; and so, like one
beating the air, she soon exhausted herself. her departure was like the
lifting of a storm-cloud from the dwelling of mr. dainty; but the storm
did not pass without leaving some traces of its evil work. scarcely had
mr. dainty seen this woman beyond the threshold, ere he was startled by
a cry of distress from his wife, and the eager calling of his name. on
reaching the chamber from which her voice came, he saw madeline lying
upon the bed, pale and deathly in appearance; and when he laid his
hands upon her he found that she was rigid and insensible.

chapter xii.

a fearful mystery.

the family physician, who was hurriedly summoned to the
strangely-affected child, entered the dwelling of mr. dainty in about
thirty minutes after the departure of mrs. jeckyl. he found madeline
showing a few signs of returning animation, but not of conscious life.
her face was still of an ashen hue, and its expression painful to look
upon. at first he asked no questions, endeavoring, by an observation of
her symptoms, to comprehend the case. he soon saw that extraordinary
causes had been at work, and that the child's condition was one not to
be reached through ordinary treatment. after looking at her for some
minutes, and examining all the life-indications, he said, turning to
mr. dainty,—

"how long has she been in this state?"

"more than half an hour."

"what produced it?"

"i am not able to answer your question,—at least, not satisfactorily.
to me her state is unaccountable."

"had she a fall, or a fright?" asked the physician.

"neither. and yet her mind was seriously disturbed."

"by what?"

"i can scarcely explain, for i am in doubt myself."

"perhaps your wife can answer my questions more clearly." and the
physician addressed himself to mrs. dainty. but the mother was silent.
to her mind there was a deep mystery in the affair. that madeline's
state was, in some way, dependent upon mrs. jeckyl's influence over
her, she had a vague conviction. but as to the manner and meaning of
this influence she was in total ignorance.

"will you inform me, as briefly as possible, as to the condition of
things existing at the time this partial suspension of life took place?"

the physician addressed mrs. dainty.

"i think she was frightened at something said by george," mrs. dainty
answered.

"what was that something?"

"he said that our governess had a snake in her bosom, and that snakes
were crawling all over her."

the doctor looked thoughtfully upon the floor, and waited for
additional information. but mrs. dainty said nothing further. little
george was standing close to the bedside. as the doctor raised his
head, his eyes rested upon the boy's face.

"i think," he said, as he looked at the bright-eyed child, "that you
must have seen very sharp to find serpents about miss harper."

"oh, it wasn't miss harper!" replied the boy, in a quick tone: "she's
lovely!"

"who, then, was it? i thought miss harper was governess to your
children?" and the physician turned to mrs. dainty.

"no, sir; miss harper is no longer the governess of my children."

there was a certain coldness of manner about mrs. dainty that was meant
to repress inquiry on this particular subject.

"i hope, madam," said the doctor, speaking with some earnestness, and
a little severity of tone, "that you will be as unreserved as possible
in your communications. unless i have all the information in regard to
the cause of madeline's illness that it is in your power to give me,
it will be impossible to prescribe intelligently, or with any hope of
reaching the case. miss harper, i understand, then, was not the person
to whom your little son referred as having a snake in her bosom?"

as mrs. dainty did not reply immediately, uncle john spoke out in his
blunt way, and right to the purpose, saying,—

"no, it was not miss harper, but a wicked old hag that my niece picked
up somewhere. if i had any faith in witchcraft, i would believe that
she had laid a spell on madeline."

the doctor now turned to uncle john.

"when did this new governess of whom you speak come into the family?"

"to-day."

"only to-day?"

"she came into the house only a few hours ago."

"was madeline well this morning?"

"perfectly."

"this is a sudden illness, then?"

"so i understand it," replied uncle john. "how is it, agnes?" and he
spoke to the sister of madeline, who was leaning over the bed, gazing
with wet eyes upon her pallid face. "did madeline show any symptoms of
illness before this sudden attack?"

"she has acted strangely ever since mrs. jeckyl came into the house."

"mrs. jeckyl!" said the physician, in a tone of surprise.

the eyes of all turned quickly to his face with looks of inquiry.

"do you know this woman?" asked mr. dainty.

"i am not certain. but i think i have heard the name before." there was
an air of evasion about the doctor.

"she is an englishwoman," remarked mr. fleetwood.

the doctor looked at agnes, and pursued his inquiries.

"acted strangely, you say. in what respect?"

"i can hardly explain, sir," replied agnes. "but i have heard tell of
birds being charmed by serpents; and the way madeline acted toward
mrs. jeckyl made me think all the while of a bird and a serpent. i do
not much wonder that georgie saw snakes in her eyes. they were the
strangest eyes i ever looked into, and made me shudder. she's done
something dreadful to madeline!"

"were they alone together?" inquired the physician.

"for a little while."

"did madeline seem repelled, or attracted, by this woman?"

"both. she appeared to be drawn toward her, yet acted like one
struggling to get away. oh, sir, it was dreadful! i never met so
terrible a woman! her eyes shone, sometimes, like coals of fire. i was
afraid of her."

"did you see her put her hands on madeline?"

"yes, sir."

"in what manner?"

"she held her with one hand, while with the other she smoothed her
hair."

"did madeline try to get away?"

"at first she did; but after a while all her struggles ceased, and she
laid her head back against her, half shutting her eyes, and looking
like one just going to sleep."

the doctor's countenance assumed a still graver aspect.

"was this woman an entire stranger?" he asked, in tones of surprise,
turning to mrs. dainty.

"she came highly recommended by mrs. ashton, as an accomplished
englishwoman, the widow of a distinguished officer who died in the
service of the east india company."

"her own story, i suppose, believed by mrs. ashton without evidence.
and on this slight knowledge of the woman you placed these tender,
impressible children under her control!"

and the doctor shook his head ominously.

"there has been harm done here," he added, "beyond my skill to cure."

"what harm?" mrs. dainty's face grew suddenly as pale as the face of
her unconscious child.

"do you not know, madam," said the doctor, "that there are men and
women at this day who possess an evil power over the minds of those who
submit themselves to their influence, stronger than even the witch of
endor possessed of old,—persons in mysterious league with evil spirits,
who delight through them to break down the soul's god-given freedom and
make it the slave of their will? if this were my child, i would rather
a thousand times see her pass upward into heaven than live on here
exposed to the assaults of infernal spirits, who, in my opinion, have
gained admittance to her through this evil woman's power!"

"doctor," said mr. fleetwood, laying his hand upon the physician's arm
with some firmness of clasp, "no more of that, if you please! it is
neither the time nor the place!"

"i stand rebuked," answered the doctor. "but i feel strongly on this
subject, and am apt to speak warmly."

"time is passing," said mr. fleetwood, "and every moment is precious.
this child needs your most skilful attention. i think you understand
her case as fully as it can be understood through any further
explanation at this time. we place her in your hands. do for her to the
utmost of your skill."

chapter xiii.

doubt and anxiety.

it was nearly two hours from the time the physician entered the house
of mr. dainty before he retired, and then the night had fallen. he left
madeline in a natural slumber, and with her pulses beating evenly. she
had recovered from her almost cataleptic condition with the rapidity
of one awakening, and showed a tranquil rather than disturbed state of
mind. the presence of the doctor seemed a little to surprise her, and
she asked, as she looked from face to face, who had been sick. soon
after, like one overwearied, she sunk into a gentle sleep.

before retiring from the house, the physician had a long conversation
with mr. dainty and mr. fleetwood, in which he gave it as his opinion
that mrs. jeckyl had attempted to gain a mesmeric influence over
madeline, and with a successful result that it was frightful to
contemplate.

"she looked to me like a very fiend incarnate," said mr. fleetwood. "i
can believe any thing against her as to evil purpose; but i am hardly
prepared to reach your conclusion in the case."

"has the child ever shown symptoms of nervous disease at all resembling
her present affection?"

"never," replied mr. dainty.

"you heard agnes describe the way in which she acted toward this woman?"

"yes."

"was it not remarkable?"

"very."

"have you any theory in regard to it different from mine?"

"i have no theory on the subject," said mr. dainty. "the whole thing is
beyond my reach."

"are you familiar with these modern phenomena, which some call, oddly
enough, spiritualism?"

a look of disgust came into the face of mr. dainty, as he answered,—

"no."

"if you were familiar with them, either from reading or observation,"
said the doctor, "you might be inclined to think as i do touching your
daughter's sudden terror, which was followed by so deep a prostration
of mind and body."

"her imagination," said mr. fleetwood, "is no doubt far more active
than we had supposed, and she may have an idiosyncrasy in regard to
snakes which threw her into a condition of paralyzing terror when
george declared that the woman had serpents crawling all over her. i am
sure that her eyes were remarkably snaky at the time. this, to me, is a
more intelligible explanation."

the doctor did not urge his view of the case, although his response
to mr. fleetwood was not of a character to show any leaning, on his
part, to that gentleman's opinion. after charging them to keep madeline
as free as possible from all disturbing influences, he went away,
promising to call in the morning.

before making his visit to the house of mr. dainty on the next day, the
doctor, whose mind had become very much interested in madeline's case,
called to see mrs. ashton, whom he knew very well. after making a few
friendly inquiries about her family, he said,—

"you recommended to mrs. dainty an englishwoman as a suitable person to
take the place of governess to her children?"

an expression of surprise came into the face of mrs. ashton, as she
answered,—

"i have not the pleasure of an acquaintance with mrs. dainty."

for a moment the doctor looked puzzled. before he had time to put
another question, mrs. ashton said,—

"there is an englishwoman named jeckyl——"

"the same! what do you know of her?" the doctor spoke quickly,
interrupting the lady.

"very little," replied mrs. ashton. "but why do you question me in
regard to this woman, dr. edmonson?"

"mrs. dainty engaged her on your recommendation."

"on my recommendation!"

"yes."

"in the first place, doctor, i don't know mrs. dainty, except by sight;
and, in the second place, i have never recommended mrs. jeckyl to
anybody."

"there has been some deception, then," said dr. edmonson.

"there certainly has, if i have been made to endorse the woman. i
did speak of her, to one or two persons, as an englishwoman who
desired to get the situation of governess, and i may have spoken of
her as educated and accomplished,—not so much from my knowledge of
her acquirements as from her own testimony in the case. and now i
remember that somebody told me that mrs. dainty was about changing her
governess, and that i mentioned this to mrs. jeckyl and advised her to
see about the matter. this is the utmost of my doings in the case."

"what is your impression of the woman?" inquired the doctor.

"not particularly favorable," said mrs. ashton. "i can hardly tell how
she got access to my family in the beginning. at first i pitied her
lonely and almost helpless condition in a strange country, and felt
some interest in her; but this interest has steadily diminished, until
now the woman is so repulsive that i can scarcely endure her presence."

"and this is all you know of her?"

"all; and i am pained to think that she has been received into any
family on my supposed recommendation. i should not like her to have
a controlling influence over my children. but pray, doctor, what has
happened in connection with her and mrs. dainty's family? i hope she
has not been robbing them, or any thing of that kind?"

"nothing of that kind," answered the doctor. "but i'm afraid she has
been attempting mesmeric influence over one of mrs. dainty's children."

"dr. edmonson!"

there was about mrs. ashton a peculiar tone and manner that excited the
doctor's curiosity.

"are you aware that she possesses any power of this kind?"

"your question throws a flood of light into my mind," said mrs. ashton,
"and gives, i think, the key to a singular fact that has always
puzzled me. on occasion of one of mrs. jeckyl's visits here, my little
emmeline was suffering with a sick headache. you know how much she has
been troubled with these headaches. she was lying on the sofa, with
pale face, and red, suffused eyes, when this woman came in. seeing
that emmeline was sick, she made a number of inquiries about her, and
then, sitting down by the sofa, laid her hand, with a light pressure,
as i could see, upon her head. ‘poor child!' she murmured, and then
began stroking her hair. i noticed that she bent down and looked very
intently into her face. i thought her manner a little curious, but
did not regard it as significant of any thing unusual. this result
followed: emmeline, in less than two minutes, closed her eyes and
went off into a deep sleep, which lasted over an hour, or until mrs.
jeckyl ended her visit. on rising to go, she referred to the child,
and, leaning over her, moved her hand, in what struck me as a singular
way, over her face. emmeline roused up instantly. ‘how does your head
feel, dear?' asked this woman. ‘it does not ache any,' was answered.
‘i thought you would be better,' said mrs. jeckyl, as if speaking to
herself. once or twice since, in thinking of this incident, i have had
a vague impression that the sleep of emmeline on that occasion was not
a natural one, and that it depended, in some way, on the act of mrs.
jeckyl."

"i have no doubt of it," said dr. edmonson.

"you have not?"

"no: evidently the woman transferred, for the time, some will-force of
her own to the child, producing temporary unconsciousness. her spirit
overshadowed the helpless little one."

the words of dr. edmonson sent a shudder along the nerves of mrs.
ashton.

"you frighten me!" she said.

"you have cause to be frightened. when half-insane men and women step
beyond the orderly course of natural life and invoke powers of evil—for
all things disorderly are evil—to enable them to exercise a mysterious
and controlling influence over their weaker fellow men and women, there
is subtle danger abroad, more fearful in its effects than the invisible
pestilence walking in darkness and wasting at noonday. it is no light
thing, mrs. ashton, to disturb the divine harmonies of the human
soul,—to thrust an impious hand boldly down among its hidden strings! i
am amazed at the folly and weakness that prevail on this subject,—at
the singular infatuation of well-meaning persons, who permit themselves
to become the instruments of invisible powers and influences the
quality of which even the feeblest reason might determine. to hear
some of these persons talk confidently, and with self-satisfied tone
and countenance, about penetrating the arcana of the spiritual world,
excites my mirth sometimes, but oftener affects me with sadness."

"i have two or three friends," said mrs. ashton, "who have been carried
away by these things, and their lapse from reason has caused me deep
regret."

"you rightly designate their state of mind," replied the doctor, "as
a lapse from reason. no mind possessing a _true rational balance_
is in any danger of falling from its mountain-height and crystal
atmosphere, where every thing is seen in its true relation, down into
this miry valley, where the thick atmosphere distorts every object and
mirage adds its mocking illusions. i am in no wonder at the result,—at
toppling reason, lapsing virtue, desolated homes! every tree may be
known by its fruit; and the product of this has shown itself to be evil
from rind to core!

"never again, mrs. ashton, permit this woman jeckyl to darken your
chambers with the shadow of her presence. if she have once brought
your little emmeline under this direful influence of which we are
speaking, she has disturbed the natural order of her mind and gained
a certain power over her. a second trance will be induced more easily
than the first. even by her serpent-eye she may cast on her a spell."

mrs. ashton grew pale and shuddered.

"i warn you in plain words," added the doctor, "speaking as i think,
and from a solemn sense of duty. mrs. jeckyl, if i am to judge by
the way in which her presence and active sphere affected one of mrs.
dainty's children, has a potency of will almost irresistible. in
madeline's efforts at resistance—for she manifested from the very
beginning an intense repugnance toward the woman—she was thrown
into a condition of trance profound almost as death. the state in
which i discovered her, when summoned by the family, was not that
of an ordinary suspension of vital powers. i saw in an instant that
extraordinary causes had been at work. and i now fully comprehend the
case. there has been a disturbance of the order of that child's life
that may never be corrected. ah, mrs. ashton, a mother can never be too
careful in the selection of those who are to be the daily companions,
and, i might say, educators, of her children!"

from the house of mrs. ashton, dr. edmonson went to mrs. dainty's.
he found madeline as well, apparently, as usual, and her mother's
cheerfulness restored. he made an effort to startle her mind with a
clear apprehension of the danger through which the child had just
passed, but only partially succeeded. mrs. dainty hadn't much faith,
she said, in the strange stories told about the power of mesmerists,
and considered nine-tenths of the alleged phenomena as sheer delusion.
she could understand how madeline's repugnance to mrs. jeckyl might
have been so strong as to produce vital suspension for a period; but
that mrs. jeckyl had gained any power over her was a thing not to be
admitted for a moment.

the doctor observed madeline very closely, and was satisfied that a
change had taken place.

"did you sleep well last night?" he inquired of her.

"not very well," was answered.

"why?"

"i had ugly dreams, that waked me up."

"often?"

"two or three times."

"what did you dream about?"

"i don't know."

"try if you can remember one of your dreams."

"i fell into the water once," said madeline.

"and that woke you?"

"no, sir; but i thought that mrs. jeckyl tried to push me under, and
that made me wake up."

the doctor looked very earnestly into madeline's face. its expression
troubled him.

"can you remember another dream?"

"no, sir; i can't remember any more."

"you may be thankful, mrs. dainty," said dr. edmonson, "that
circumstances so soon showed the character of this woman. the harm she
might have done your children is inconceivable."

"i think you put too serious a face upon the matter, doctor," replied
mrs. dainty.

"time, i fear, will tell you a different story," said the doctor, as he
arose to depart. "for the present let me enjoin upon you to keep this
child as free as possible from all disturbing causes."

mrs. dainty made no answer, and the doctor, bowing almost formally,
bade her good-morning.

chapter xiv.

painful consequences.

"madeline."

mrs. dainty looked up, a slight expression of annoyance coming into her
face: uncle john stood before her.

"well? what is it?" she did not speak with an air of encouragement; nor
did she by look or motion give the old gentleman an invitation to sit
down. he had entered the library, where she was reading.

"i want to have a talk with you about the children," said mr.
fleetwood. he was altogether self-possessed, and his tone and manner
were earnest.

a deeper shade of annoyance passed over the countenance of mrs. dainty.

"you still purpose having a governess?"

"i don't know that i purpose any thing," replied mrs. dainty. "i've had
such wretched luck, so far, with governesses, that i shall hardly feel
safe in trying another."

"why not recall miss harper?" said mr. fleetwood.

"uncle john!" mrs. dainty turned upon the old gentleman a look of
indignant surprise.

"the children are all attached to her; and she is pure-minded,
true-hearted, and——"

"she's insolent and upstart!" retorted mrs. dainty, with passion; "and
i will never have her back in her old place."

"you have altogether misapprehended florence," urged mr. fleetwood,
with unusual earnestness of manner.

"i am not apt to misapprehend people," said mrs. dainty, drawing her
head up a little proudly.

"have you noticed madeline particularly, during the last few days?"
inquired mr. fleetwood, after a pause.

"particularly? how?" mrs. dainty looked curiously at the old gentleman.

"do you see no change in her since that remarkable experience with mrs.
jeckyl?"

"no," was answered, without hesitation.

"i have."

"indeed! you are sharp-sighted, uncle john!" mrs. dainty spoke lightly.

"love is always sharp-sighted when danger is about," was sententiously
answered.

"you are fanciful."

"no, madeline!" the countenance of mr. fleetwood became still more
serious. "no, madeline; i am not a dealer in light fancies, but a man
of sober thoughts and direct purposes, as you have reason to know.
there is a change in our little pet, and one boding, i fear, unhappy
consequences, unless she is at once surrounded by counteracting
influences. the spirit of that bad woman, in overshadowing her, left
something of its darkness on her young spirit."

mrs. dainty sighed unconsciously.

"what is the change you have observed, uncle john?" she said, her
repellant manner subsiding.

"do you remember to have heard her merry laugh ringing through the
house as of old?"

mrs. dainty thought for a moment or two, and then replied,—

"i do not."

"do you know where she is now?"

"no."

"come with me."

the old gentleman arose, and moved toward the library-door. his niece
followed him, with a look of questioning interest on her countenance.

"where is she?" the mother spoke in a whisper.

"step softly," said mr. fleetwood.

from the library they went noiselessly up to the nursery.

"see!" and the old gentleman directed the attention of his niece to
madeline, who was sitting there alone, her back to the door, silent and
motionless.

"she is reading," whispered the mother.

uncle john shook his head.

"madeline!" mrs. dainty could not repress the impulse to speak.

the child started up and turned with something of a frightened look
toward the door.

"what are you doing here all alone?" asked mrs. dainty.

"nothing," answered the child, looking confused.

"nothing?"

"no, ma'am."

"how long have you been here alone?"

"i don't know."

"come down with me to the library."

"i'd rather stay here," replied madeline.

"and i'd rather have you in the library," said mrs. dainty, with an air
of impatience.

"i wasn't doing any thing," urged madeline.

"i didn't say that you were. but that doesn't signify. come down into
the library."

"i don't want to go down into the library."

"come! do you hear me?"

but madeline stirred not.

mrs. dainty was about starting forward to grasp the child's arm and
constrain obedience, when uncle john held her back, whispering,—

"patience! patience! remember that you are now dealing with a diseased
mind instead of a healthy one. there is something wrong about the
child, and, if you love her, be prudent."

"you deal in riddles," said mrs. dainty, yielding to the constraining
force of uncle john. "disobedience, it strikes me, is a disease that
should be dealt with promptly." she spoke in a whisper.

"madeline!" there was a winning tenderness in the old man's voice that
found its way to the child's heart, for she moved toward uncle john and
grasped his outstretched hand. the moment she felt its warm pressure,
she shrunk close to his side, while a pleasant change in her young face
revealed the change which had come over her spirit.

"i want you in the library," said mrs. dainty, firmly. she did not
think it right to let the child have her own way.

"come," uncle john spoke, cheerfully; and moving away, madeline
followed without resistance.

but mrs. dainty failed altogether in awakening an interest in the
child's mind. uncle john, thinking it best to leave them alone for a
time, withdrew from the library. the mother, on whose mind a pressure
of concern had fallen, took down a large volume of natural history,
filled with costly engravings, and, opening it on a table, drew
madeline's attention to the pictures.

"isn't this beautiful?" she said, pausing over a group of
exquisitely-colored birds.

"yes, ma'am," replied the child, in a tone that betrayed an entire lack
of interest.

"humming-birds! oh, how beautiful!" the tones of mrs. dainty's voice
were animated. "this one with golden wings and emerald-green bosom is
like the darling wee bird we saw this spring, fluttering among the
honeysuckle-leaves in the garden. isn't it sweet?"

"yes, ma'am."

there was not a ripple of interest in madeline's voice.

"don't you like birds?" inquired the disappointed mother.

"yes, ma'am."

"here are two beautiful doves. how lifelike! it seems every moment as
if they would fly away! a'n't they lovely, dear?"

"yes, ma'am."

mrs. dainty bent down and looked into the child's face. her eyes were
not on the book, but cast dreamily to the floor, and there was in her
countenance a sad expression.

"madeline!" mrs. dainty spoke with a suddenness that caused her child
to start and the varying color to dance over her face.

"what do you mean by this? i don't understand you!" mrs. dainty's mind
was growing confused through impatience.

for an instant madeline looked frightened, and then burst into tears.

"what are you crying about, silly child? what ails you?"

madeline answered nothing, but wept more violently.

"are you sick?"

"no, ma'am," sobbed the unhappy child.

"what's the matter with you, then?"

"i don't know."

"crying like a baby, and don't know for what? shame on you!"

madeline moved away from her mother's side, as if a hand had been
suddenly pressed against her.

"come, now! there's been enough of this! dry up your tears at once, and
be a good girl! here! let me wipe them all away."

and she caught madeline with one hand, while with the other she held a
handkerchief to her eyes. but the fountain of tears was not so easily
dried up. madeline wept on, sobbing in a wild, convulsed manner.

"i'm out of all patience!" exclaimed mrs. dainty. her mind, instead of
getting clearer, was becoming more and more clouded by passion. "if you
don't stop this crying for nothing, i'll punish you! hush, i say!"

there was an instant of strong agitation, as if the will of the child
were contending vigorously with an almost overpowering flood of
emotion; and then all was still as death. madeline stood motionless,
and silent as a statue.

"very well," said mrs. dainty, coldly; "i'm glad to see that you can
obey if you will, and i look to having no more annoyances of this kind.
go and sit down, or amuse yourself in some way."

but madeline did not stir.

"do you hear me?" mrs. dainty spoke sharply.

still the child stood motionless.

"madeline!"

no response.

"don't trifle with me, child!"

the stern, threatening voice uttered its injunction in vain.

"madeline! answer me, or i will punish you severely."

the mother had raised her hand to strike a blow, when mr. fleetwood,
who remained near the library-door, came in hastily, and with a look
and gesture warned her against that extremity.

"uncle john!" exclaimed the excited woman, losing all patience, "i wish
you would mind your own business, and not interfere with me. you only
encourage this self-willed child in her spirit of disobedience!"

and before mr. fleetwood had time to reply she caught madeline by the
arm, and dragged her from the library, and through the passages to her
own apartment, the door of which she closed and locked.

"you'll find that i'm in earnest!" she exclaimed, in a husky but
determined voice, as she hurried madeline across the room. seating
herself, she drew the child close in front of her, and, looking
steadily into her face, said,—

"speak! what do you mean by this conduct?"

the aspect of madeline's face, as it now appeared in the eyes of mrs.
dainty, was so strange that alarm took the place of anger. all life
seemed to have receded therefrom. the blue lips stood apart, the eyes
were wide open, almost staring, the skin was of an ashen hue. lifting
her quickly from the floor, the mother laid her child upon a bed, and,
after bending over her a few moments anxiously, went to the door and
called mr. fleetwood.

"i warned you," said the old gentleman, in a reproving voice, as he
saw the child's condition. "i told you that you were dealing with a
diseased mind!"

"what _can_ ail her? oh, uncle john, send at once for the doctor!"
mrs. dainty wrung her hands, and stood glancing from madeline to mr.
fleetwood, her countenance pale with fear.

the old gentleman bent down over the child, laying his hand upon her
forehead and breast, and then searching along her wrists with his
fingers. her flesh was cold, and damp with perspiration, and there was
so feeble a motion in the heart that scarcely a wave of life could be
felt along the arteries.

"oh, send for the doctor! she may die!" mrs. dainty was overwhelmed
with distress.

"be patient. control yourself, madeline." uncle john spoke with unusual
calmness. "get cold water and bathe her forehead and temples."

this was done, and signs of more active life followed. a warmer color
returned to her cheeks; respiration became deeper; the half-opened
eyes closed, giving the look of sleep, instead of death, to her
childish face.

"what is the meaning of this? what has come over the child?" said mrs.
dainty, breathing more freely as she saw that a new and healthier
action had supervened: "i don't understand it, uncle john."

"there is disease of the mind, madeline, as i have been trying for the
last hour to make you understand. its exact nature cannot at once be
determined. neither anger nor force will avail any thing: of that be
fully assured."

"but, uncle john, she must not be permitted to have her own will
entirely. that leads to ruin."

"of course not. the government of love, wise and gentle in all its
ministrations,—not the government of angry force,—must have rule. see
into what a mental paralysis your efforts to compel submission have
thrown her. if her mind's condition had been a healthy one, this would
never have occurred. deal with her, then, wisely and gently, as you
would deal with the sick."

mrs. dainty sighed deeply, and looked troubled.

"what does it mean, uncle john? what is the cause of this strange
affection?"

"it was not so before mrs. jeckyl came into the house."

mrs. dainty gave an unwilling assent.

"something has been done to her by that woman. if i were a believer in
witchcraft i would say that she had laid a spell upon the child; that
madeline was under the influence of an evil eye."

"there is something wrong," murmured mrs. dainty, speaking partly
to herself,—"something wrong! i wish i had never seen that dreadful
woman." a low shudder pervaded her nerves.

"yes, something very wrong," said mr. fleetwood; "and it will require
the wisest care on our part to restore the harmonious action of her
life, so suddenly and so strangely disturbed."

for nearly two hours madeline lay in a deep sleep; and during all that
time mrs. dainty sat by the bedside. when she awoke at last, her mind
was in a tranquil state, like one coming out of a refreshing slumber.
but she exhibited none of her old lightness of spirit,—was quiet, yet
cheerful, rather than of pensive mood. she did not seem inclined to
join, as of old, her little brother george, master "don't care," in any
of his sports, but rather shrunk away into unobserved places, sitting
quiet and idle.

chapter xv.

alarming occurrence.

time made very little change in madeline's state; no change, at least,
for the better. twice during the succeeding fortnight her mother's
anger was excited against her, and the strong, passionate will of the
one set itself vigorously to work to subdue the so-called "wilfulness"
of the other. but each time the storm, like all storms, made itself
felt only in wreck and ruin. madeline, after the exhaustion of the wild
strife of passion was over, showed a moody, absent exterior, and an
increased tendency to be alone.

"what can ail the child?" mrs. dainty would say, in her uneasiness and
perplexity, now appealing to her husband, and now to uncle john. but
from neither could any solution of the mystery of her strange state be
derived. the family physician was called in and consulted, though with
little satisfaction. "there must be a change for madeline," he said.
"her mind must be diverted. she is in a morbid state;" with much more
to the same purpose. yet nothing was gained. the mental disease abated
not, but commenced assuming new forms. morbid desire began taking the
place of morbid indifference; and, if this inordinate craving were
not indulged, fits of nervous prostration followed the excitement of
contention, resembling the stupor of opium.

it now became a matter of serious consideration in the family as to
how madeline was to be treated by the other members. suddenly her will
had grown exacting. the mild-tempered, gentle, loving little girl had
become imperious, selfish, and demanding. if she desired a thing, or
wished for an indulgence, no amount of opposition subdued her. denial,
argument, punishment, increased instead of weakening her purpose, and
the certain result was a nervous spasm, or deep stupor, lasting at
times for hours. so long as she had her own way, the current of her
life glided along smoothly; but any obstruction swelled it into a
turbulent flood, the dark depths of which were hidden from all eyes.

the doctor strongly recommended change of place, new associations.
"send her out in the carriage every day, or take her to the public
squares for a ramble among the children," he would urge, when he saw
her moving in her quiet way about the house, and marked the singular
expression of her countenance, that had in it something almost weird.

one day agnes, the elder sister, accompanied by george, had taken
madeline to the city square through which they wandered for some
time. growing tired, the girls sat down to observe a party of little
children who were jumping the rope, while george, boy-like, took a wide
range over the grounds. suddenly the attention of agnes was called to
madeline by an exclamation, and, looking around and into her face,
she saw that her eyes were fixed on some object with a look of fear.
following their direction, she saw at a short distance the repulsive
form of mrs. jeckyl, who was standing perfectly still, gazing at them.
her first instinctive movement was to shade the eyes of madeline with
her hand and thus hide from her the form which had disturbed her with
its presence. as she did so, madeline shut her eyes and leaned her head
back against her sister.

as soon as mrs. jeckyl saw that she was observed, she came forward,
offering her hand to agnes in a familiar way, and inquiring with an
affectation of interest about the family.

"ah," she continued, "and here is my little pet, maddy!" placing
her hand, as she spoke, on the head of madeline, whose slight form
quivered and shrunk at the touch.

"how are you, dear?" she asked, in tones meant to be winning.

but madeline kept her face buried in her sister's garments.

"that little rebel brother tried to frighten my pet," she added, her
hand still playing with the child's curls,—"the naughty boy! but maddy
was my jewel! little darling! come! look up, and let me see, if only
for a moment, that pair of bright eyes."

agnes felt the head of madeline slowly turning, as if she wished to get
a stealthy glance at the woman's face.

"ah! peep-bo! peep!" said mrs. jeckyl, playfully. "i thought the light
would come."

madeline had taken a single look, and then hidden her face again.

"how have you been, darling?" mrs. jeckyl bent her head close down to
the face of madeline.

the child made no answer.

still the woman's hand was on her head, and restlessly moving among the
sunny curls. twice had agnes pushed it away with a firm effort; but it
returned again persistently. she had a strange, bewildered feeling,
and an impulse to catch madeline in her arms and flee away, as from
impending danger.

"ah! peep-bo!" madeline had stolen another look, and the woman,
watchful as a serpent, had caught the glance; and now her eye held that
of the child, who did not again turn her face away, but continued to
gaze upon that of mrs. jeckyl.

"you are a little darling!" said mrs. jeckyl, now bending close to
madeline, and smiling upon her in her most winning manner. "the
sweetest pet in all the world! here, sit on my lap." and she made
an attempt to lift madeline from the arm of her sister; but agnes
resisted, saying, coldly,—

"if you please, madam, let her remain where she is."

but the woman was bent on having her own way. not seeming even to hear
the words of agnes, she applied her strength, and drew the child upon
her lap. a deep fluttering sigh came up from the heart of madeline,
and light spasms quivered over her face. there was a brief, feeble
resistance; then strength and will were subdued, and, passive as a
babe, she shrunk against the woman, laying her head down upon her bosom.

roused by fear and indignation, agnes started to her feet, and,
grasping her sister by the arms, said, as she exerted her strength in
the effort to remove her,—

"let her go, mrs. jeckyl!"

"don't fret yourself, my dear," said the woman, fixing her glittering
eyes into those of agnes, with a look meant to subdue her also. but the
effort to hold her passive by the strength of a powerful will failed
wholly.

"release my sister!" she added, sternly.

but mrs. jeckyl drew her arm the more tightly around madeline, and with
her steady eye sought to throw a spell over agnes.

grown desperate with fear, agnes now exerted all her strength, and with
a single violent jerk succeeded in wresting the half-insensible form of
her sister from the arms of mrs. jeckyl.

"you're a polite young lady!" said mrs. jeckyl, in a sneering manner.
"this is american good-breeding, i suppose!"

"and you're a wicked woman," replied agnes, indignantly confronting the
enemy.

"snakes! snakes!" it was the ringing, exultant voice of little
"don't-care" george, who had circled the square in a trot, and just
returned to the place where he had left his sisters.

mrs. jeckyl turned with a start upon this unwelcome intruder.

"old snakes!" said the boy, stooping before the woman, with his hands
upon his knees, and a grin of exultation on his face. "old snakes!"

fierce as a tiger did she advance upon george; but she had an
antagonist to deal with who was an over-match for her.

"take care!" exclaimed the boy, as he darted around a lady who was
passing, thus putting her between him and mrs. jeckyl; "take care,
ma'am: that's old snakes!"

the lady started, and looked half frightened.

"take care!" repeated young america. "she's got a snake in her bosom!
there! don't you see its head peeping out?"

"mercy!" exclaimed the lady, springing away from mrs. jeckyl, who, in
trying to catch george, ran against her.

"snakes! snakes! old snakes!" screamed the little rebel, dancing with
delight, and soon attracting a crowd of men, women, and children to the
spot.

"where are the snakes?" asked one and another.

"there she goes! don't you see her? that is old snakes!" answered the
laughing boy, pointing to mrs. jeckyl, who, a second time discomfited
by weapons for which she had neither shield nor armor, was acting on
the principle that discretion was the better part of valor, and making
a hasty retreat from the battle-field.

"you're a very rude little boy," said a grave old gentleman.

"and she's a very wicked woman," answered little don't care, looking
boldly up into the speaker's face.

"why did you call her snakes?" inquired the man: "there's no sense in
that."

"if you'd looked into her eyes, you'd have seen them," replied george,
half carelessly; and then, grasping the outstretched hand of his sister
agnes, he withdrew from the little crowd, and passed with quick steps
homeward.

chapter xvi.

disappearance of madeline.

the danger which threatened madeline had suddenly taken on a new and
more alarming aspect. with the removal of mrs. jeckyl from the house of
mr. dainty, it was believed that all direct influence had ceased, and
that whatever of evil she had wrought upon the child would gradually
lose its power over her as time progressed. but the enemy had not left
the field; there was only a change of position.

the detail by agnes, in an excited manner, of what had occurred in the
city square, sent through all hearts a thrill of fear. in the family
council, mr. dainty talked indignantly of the police and arrest, while
mr. fleetwood, for the most part silent, walked the floor with uneasy
footsteps.

"i shall not dare to let madeline pass our own threshold," said mrs.
dainty, in a troubled voice, "though she is dying for change of air and
change of scene. oh, isn't it dreadful!"

"the woman must be arrested," mr. dainty announced, for the tenth
time,—the only remedy he had to suggest.

"what good?" inquired uncle john.

"we will have her bound over to keep the peace," said mr. dainty.

uncle john shook his head as he answered, "you cannot bind the
influence of her evil eye. it may fall upon our precious one at any
moment least expected, and in spite of all law or police. the danger
comes from a new direction, and is too subtle in its nature to be
restrained by common bonds."

"what then are we to do?" asked mrs. dainty, wringing her hands in a
distressed manner.

but no one ventured a reply to her question.

after a long and troubled session, the family council broke up, without
having arrived at any satisfactory result beyond the common conclusion
that it would not be safe to let madeline, in her present state, go
out, and thus be in danger of meeting the strange woman who had thrown
so fearful a spell over her young spirit.

singularly enough, the child, from this time, showed a restless desire
to get away from the house. instead of creeping into lonely rooms by
herself, she would seek the front windows and door, and stand gazing
into the street, her eyes wandering up and down among the passengers,
as if in search of some one. when taken from the door or windows, she
would resist, and sometimes fall into passionate fits, that left her
in a strange stupor. three times within a week she attempted to steal
away; and once she succeeded in getting off, but was met by her father,
who happened to be returning home, when only a few blocks distant. to
his inquiries as to where she was going, she replied, "to the square."
after a slight opposition, she concluded to go back with him, but was
moody and ill-natured for the rest of the day.

so it continued for weeks, with but little change for the better.
mrs. dainty's fears were all the while excited, and she never felt
comfortable a moment when madeline was away from her.

one day, in taking her usual after-dinner sleep, mrs. dainty was
visited by a frightful dream about madeline, so vivid in its character
as to awaken her. her first impulse, the moment bewildered thoughts ran
clear, was to seek for her child. "madeline!" she called, going to her
chamber-door. for a moment or two she stood listening, then called, in
a louder voice, "madeline! madeline!"

"madeline!" it was the voice of the oldest daughter, calling from the
library.

"agnes, where is madeline?"

"i do not know," replied agnes, coming toward her mother. "i heard
her and george up in the nursery not long ago. perhaps she is there.
george!"

a pair of rapid feet responded noisily to the call.

"george, where is your sister?"

"don't know," answered the boy.

"isn't she in the nursery?"

"no, ma'am."

"i heard you and her talking there not long ago," said agnes.

"she went down-stairs for a piece of cake a good while ago."

agnes almost flew down to the kitchen, and inquired of the chambermaid,
whom she found there, if she had seen madeline.

"i heard her come down-stairs a little while ago, and i think she went
into the parlor," replied the chambermaid.

one of the parlor-shutters was found pushed open, the curtain drawn
aside, and a chair out of position.

"she has been here," said mrs. dainty, in a choking whisper.

"perhaps she has fallen asleep somewhere," suggested a domestic.

"search through the house, everywhere!" replied mrs. dainty. "look into
all the rooms and closets! how could you lose sight of her?"

but they searched in vain. the child was not in the house!

"where is uncle john?" asked mrs. dainty, in her terror and
bewilderment.

mr. fleetwood entered from the street at the moment his name was
mentioned, and in no way lessened the anxious fears of his niece by his
troubled exclamations on learning that madeline was nowhere to be found
in the house.

"i have trembled every day in fear of this!" said the old man, pacing
the floor in great agitation. "how could you leave her unguarded?"

not long, however, did mr. fleetwood remain inactive. after sending
word to mr. dainty, and despatching servants in various directions to
search through all the neighborhood, he went out himself, and commenced
a series of close inquiries at all the stores and offices within
several squares.

"had she curly hair?" inquired a boy who was buying something at one of
the stores visited by mr. fleetwood.

"yes," answered the old gentleman, with a sudden eagerness of manner.

"and wore a blue frock?"

"yes."

"was bare-headed?"

"yes."

"i saw her going down the street a good while ago. an old woman,
dressed in black, had her."

"going down the street! where?" asked mr. fleetwood, with increasing
excitement.

"by our house," replied the boy.

"where is your house?" demanded the old gentleman, in a voice that
startled not only the lad, but all the other inmates of the store.

"round in eager street."

"which way did you say they were going?"

"toward fifth street."

"i'll give you ten dollars if you'll find them!" said mr. fleetwood.

"will you?" and the lad dropped his package on the counter and started
for the door.

"ten dollars?" he paused for reassurance.

"yes,—ten gold dollars. now move on their track like lightning! but
stay! you are to report yourself at my house, the number of which is on
this card. let us hear from you speedily. now, away!"

the boy disappeared from the door and went flying down the street.

still pursuing his inquiries, mr. fleetwood met with others who
confirmed the boy's statement that a child, resembling madeline, had
been seen in company with an old woman dressed in black. this caused
him to visit the chief of police and secure his efficient aid in the
matter, thus putting in operation the most vigilant means of discovery.

it was nearly an hour after mr. fleetwood left the house, when,
disappointed in any good result, he returned to the anxious, frightened
family, to meet pale, tearful faces and trembling inquiry. mr. dainty
and the servants had also been in search of the lost one, but their
search had proved quite as fruitless. the boy who had hoped to gain the
reward of ten dollars had likewise reported himself. he had spent an
hour in vain.

night came down upon the fearfully-disturbed inmates of mr. dainty's
family, and yet madeline was absent. nothing whatever could be learned
in regard to her, except the single fact mentioned by the boy, and
confirmed by others, that a little girl resembling her had been seen in
company with an old woman dressed in black.

chapter xvii.

the search.

"it is nearly a week since mr. fleetwood was here," said mrs. elder, as
she placed her workbasket on the table and drew up a chair.

florence, who had just brought in a lighted lamp, sighed, but made no
answer to the remark.

"he seemed more than disappointed, i thought, at your persistent
refusal to make any advances toward a reconciliation with mrs. dainty,"
added mrs. elder.

"yes: he was offended." there was a touch of sadness in the low voice
of florence harper.

"no, not offended, dear," said mrs. elder, quickly. "that is too strong
a word. he was disturbed."

"he asks of me too much, aunt mary." florence spoke with some warmth.
"i am but human."

"perhaps he does. but the condition of things at mrs. dainty's must be
his excuse. see into what a state of mind madeline has fallen."

"poor child! i cannot sleep, sometimes, for thinking of her," said
florence.

"i can hardly wonder at mr. fleetwood, seeing that his heart is wrapped
up in those children. he has seen how much power for good you can
have over them, and, now that an evil hand is at work, seeking to mar
the sweet beauty of madeline's spirit, can you feel surprise at his
eagerness to bring her again within the sphere of your influence? i
cannot, florence."

"then you think i ought to go?"

aunt mary was silent.

"mrs. dainty has not desired my return."

"she has not communicated such a desire; but mr. fleetwood has over and
over again said that only weak pride keeps her from doing so. shall not
something be conceded for the children's sake?"

"if you think i ought to call and see mrs. dainty, as mr. fleetwood
proposes, i will go to-morrow," said florence.

aunt mary was silent.

"you will not advise me?" florence spoke in a perplexed voice.

"if you act from my advice, you will not act freely," said mrs. elder.
"the question, moreover, is one of such difficult solution, that i do
not see it clearly enough to speak with decision."

the bell at this moment rung violently, causing both florence and her
aunt to start and look with inquiring eyes into each other's faces. a
few moments afterward a man's feet were heard moving quickly along the
passage.

"mr. fleetwood!" ejaculated mrs. elder, rising as the old gentleman
entered hurriedly.

"florence," said mr. fleetwood, in an agitated manner, as he laid his
hand upon the arm of miss harper, "you are wanted!"

"for what? has any thing happened to the children?"

"yes,—something dreadful! madeline is lost or stolen!"

"oh, mr. fleetwood! lost! stolen! what do you mean?"

"madeline has been gone from the house for several hours, and we have
searched for her everywhere in vain. two or three persons in the
neighborhood are positive that they saw her, or a child answering in
all things her description, in company with a woman dressed in black.
that infamous mrs. jeckyl, without doubt!"

"dreadful! dreadful!" exclaimed florence, clasping her hands and
turning very pale.

"ah, florence! florence!" said mr. fleetwood, "if you had only thrown
the wings of your love around her, this would not have been!"

florence covered her face with her hands, and for some moments wept
bitterly.

"i have only wished to do right," she said, at length, with forced
composure. "more has been required of me than i had strength to
perform. but speak now, mr. fleetwood: i am ready to move at your
bidding."

"poor agnes is almost beside herself. a little while ago she said, in
her mother's presence, ‘oh, if miss harper were only here!' and her
mother said, in reply, ‘if she had not left us, this could not have
happened.' the way is plain for you, dear child! come with me! come!"

the old man's voice was pleading and tremulous. his heart was
overburdened.

"this moment," replied florence, as she turned and glided from the
room. in less than a minute she re-entered the little parlor, with
bonnet and shawl, ready to accompany mr. fleetwood. she had no cause
to complain of her reception at mrs. dainty's. agnes, the moment she
entered, sprung forward to meet her, and, laying her face against her
bosom, sobbed violently. mrs. dainty arose with a slight assumption
of dignity, but gave her hand with far more warmth of manner than mr.
fleetwood had hoped for.

"i am glad to see you, miss harper," she said,— "glad for the sake of
agnes. oh, we are in dreadful trouble! poor madeline! uncle john has
told you all. oh, my child! my child! where can she be? it will kill
me!"

and mrs. dainty fell into a fit of hysterical sobbing.

"have you no further intelligence of madeline?" mr. fleetwood inquired
of mr. dainty.

"none. i have just returned from the police-office. not a word of the
child, although reports have come in from all parts of the city."

"where did mrs. jeckyl live at the time she came here?" asked florence.
none could answer the question.

"is there no one of whom she could be inquired about?"

"mrs. ashton, i think, knows something in regard to her," said mr.
fleetwood.

"has any one been to see her?" inquired florence.

"no one. we should have thought of that before," said mr. dainty. "who
knows her residence?"

mrs. dainty gave the required information, and a servant was despatched
immediately with a note to mrs. ashton. that lady could not say where
mrs. jeckyl lived, but thought she was at a certain boarding-house in
twelfth street. thither mr. dainty went without delay.

"does a mrs. jeckyl board here?" he inquired of the waiter who came to
the door.

"no, sir," was answered, in a tone plainly enough conveying the
information that the woman about whom he made inquiry was known to the
servant.

"when did she leave?" he asked.

"a month ago."

"where can i find her?"

"don't know."

"where did she go when she left your house?"

"don't know, sir."

the waiter's manner showed some impatience, as if the very name of the
woman were an offence to him.

"i wish to see mrs. brainard. is she at home?"

"yes, sir. walk into the parlor, and i will call her down."

mr. dainty went into the parlor, and in a few moments the woman who
kept the boarding-house entered.

"you had a mrs. jeckyl here a few weeks ago?" said mr. dainty.

"i had."

"do you know where she is now?"

"no, sir." mrs. brainard's voice had in it something of impatience and
something of disgust.

"when did she leave your house?"

"nearly four weeks ago."

"where did she go?"

"i really cannot answer the question, sir. i was so glad to get her
out of my house that i let all interest in her die the moment she was
beyond my door."

"do not any of your servants know where she went?"

"it is possible, sir. i will inquire of the chambermaid."

"if you please; for i must find her, alive or dead!"

"is there any thing wrong about her?" asked mrs. brainard, curiously.

"i am afraid she has stolen my child!" said mr. dainty, his manner
growing excited.

"stolen your child!" mrs. brainard became pale and agitated, and her
eyes turned toward a little girl, not seven years old, who at the
moment entered the room. she reached out her hand, and the child drew
to her side. the moment mrs. brainard's arm could be thrown around the
little one, she clasped her eagerly, as if she felt that she had just
escaped impending danger.

"if you can aid me in tracing her," said mr. dainty, "you will confer
the highest benefit."

mrs. brainard left the room, and returned in a little while with the
chambermaid, who thought mrs. jeckyl went to a house in fifth street
near noble. the name of the person who kept the house she did not
remember. this was all the chambermaid could tell. the waiter was
questioned, but from him nothing was elicited.

"how did this woman conduct herself while in your house?" asked mr.
dainty.

"she made herself very offensive to most of my boarders, and gained
a singular influence over two of them,—ladies, who were invalids and
had been suffering for years with nervous complaints. she is a woman
of masculine intellect, sir. few men are her equal in an argument. her
satire is withering."

"so i should infer from the little i saw of her. you speak of her
influence over two ladies in your family. how was this obtained?"

"in what i regard as a very disorderly way. mrs. jeckyl is a ‘medium,'
as it is called."

"a mesmerist," said mr. dainty.

"or spiritualist, as some say. the thing has various names."

"the power, if any power is possessed by these people," said mr.
dainty, with strong evidence of feeling, "is demoniac."

"just what i have said from the beginning," replied mrs. brainard.
"i have seen much evil, but no good, result from these disorderly
practices. had i known mrs. jeckyl to be a ‘medium,' she would not have
found entrance into my house. i have closed my doors against more than
one of them."

"then mrs. jeckyl mesmerized the ladies to whom you refer?"

"she had table-tippings, rappings, writings, and all sorts of
_diablerie_ going on in their rooms for nearly a week, turning the
heads of my boarders, when i closed down upon her with a strong
hand, adding a notice to vacate her apartment. she demurred, and was
insolent. but i have a will of my own, sir, and was not to be thwarted.
if she had not left at the time specified in my notice, i would have
had her trunk set out on the pavement."

"i cannot but applaud your spirit," said mr. dainty. "desperate
diseases require desperate remedies. but time passes, and i must not
linger. what you say of the woman only adds to my anxiety and fear. i
must find her, and rescue my child, ere sleep closes an eyelid."

"heaven give you success!" said mrs. brainard.

taking a carriage, mr. dainty was driven rapidly to fifth and noble,
where he alighted, and commenced to make inquiries from house to house;
but no one had heard of a mrs. jeckyl. after a fruitless search of half
an hour, it occurred to him that the woman might have assumed another
name: so he went over the ground again, describing her person.

"there _was_ such a woman here." he received this reply at one of the
houses where he called.

"was her name jeckyl?"

"no, sir; i think it was hawks. but i'll inquire, sir, if you'll wait a
minute. won't you walk in?"

mr. dainty entered the house, and was shown into one of the parlors,
where, after waiting a short time, a lady joined him.

"pardon this intrusion," said mr. dainty, rising. "but i am in search
of an englishwoman who some three or four weeks ago took boarding in
this neighborhood. your servant informs me that there was a person here
answering to her description."

"what was the name of the woman of whom you are in search?" was
inquired.

"jeckyl," replied mr. dainty.

the lady shook her head.

"she may have reason to pass by another name," remarked mr. dainty.

"i don't know how that may be. a tall, sinister-looking englishwoman,
with an eye that held a lurking serpent, took boarding here some weeks
ago. but she only remained three or four days. she was disagreeable to
us, and we made ourselves disagreeable to her; and so we parted."

"where did she go?" mr. dainty asked, eagerly.

the lady shook her head.

"no one in this house knows. she went as she came,—a marvel and a
mystery."

"and beyond this you can give no information in regard to her?"

"none whatever."

mr. dainty stood for some moments silent and perplexed. then, with
a sickening sense of disappointment, he retired, and, entering the
carriage which awaited him at the door, ordered the driver to take him
to his own house as rapidly as possible. he brought with him neither
light nor comfort, and found none awaiting his arrival. not a single
gleam of intelligence touching the absent one had shone in upon his
afflicted family.

what more could be done? the evening had waned, and it was now past the
hour of nine. to abandon all search for the night seemed cruel; yet,
without a single clue to unravel the mystery of the child's absence,
what step could be taken toward accomplishing her recovery? whither
were they to go in search of her?

the wretched mother, from a state of almost frantic excitement,
had fallen into a condition little removed from stupor. the family
physician was called in to see her, but he prescribed nothing. her
trouble was beyond the reach of any medicines he could give.

anxious and sleepless was that night in the house of mr. dainty.
early in the morning the search for madeline was renewed. not the
least active in this search was miss harper. with a perseverance and
assiduity unknown to the sterner sex, she steadily sought to find the
clue that was to unravel the mystery of madeline's absence. starting
where mr. dainty had begun, at mrs. brainard's, she went from thence to
the house in fifth street where a woman answering to the description
of mrs. jeckyl had made a brief sojourn. beyond this point mr. dainty
had failed to go; but florence was not to be thrown off so easily. her
woman's tact and feeling all came in to quicken the interest of every
member in the family, and the result was a declaration on the part of
a servant, who was questioned repeatedly, that she thought she could
recognise the hack-driver who took the woman, with her trunk, away.

in company with this servant, an irish girl, florence visited the
various hack-stands in the city; but at none of them did the girl
recognise any driver as the one for whom they were in search, and they
were going back, the heart of florence heavy with disappointment, when
her companion exclaimed,—

"'deed, and that's the very mon himself, so it is!"

and she pointed to a hackman who was leisurely driving his carriage
along, just in advance of them.

to spring forward was but a natural impulse, and in a moment the driver
reined up his horses at the sign given by florence. leaving his box, he
stepped to the pavement, saying, as he did so,—

"want a carriage, miss?"

"i wish to ask you a question or two first," replied florence, slightly
confused at the abruptness with which she was confronted by the man.

"as many as you please, miss," returned the hack-driver.

"how long is it since that woman left your house?" asked florence,
turning to the girl.

"about two weeks," was answered.

"in the morning or afternoon?"

"in the morning."

"and this is the man who drove her away?"

"i think so. he looks like him, ony way."

"about two weeks ago," said florence, now addressing the hack-driver,
"a tall woman, dressed in black, was taken, with her trunk, from a
house in fifth street near noble. do you remember any thing about it?
were you the driver?"

"i was," replied the man.

the whole frame of miss harper quivered instantly with an eager impulse.

"can you take me to the house where you left her?" she asked.

the man stood in thought for some moments, and then answered,—

"i think so."

"will you accompany me?" florence spoke to the girl.

"certainly, miss: i'm at your service."

"drive me there as quickly as possible." and florence stepped toward
the door of the carriage, which was instantly thrown open by the
hackman. entering, with the girl, she seated herself, and was soon
driven rapidly away toward the northern part of the city, and through
streets with the aspect of which she was unfamiliar. at last the
carriage stopped before a house of not over-inviting exterior. it was
old, dingy-looking, and had a deserted aspect, all the shutters being
closed to the third story.

"this is the place, miss," said the driver, as he opened the
carriage-door.

"are you certain?" inquired florence, a slight tremor running along her
nerves as she looked up at the house.

"dead sure," replied the hackman, in a confident voice. "i know the
house by its shut-up look. i've passed here many a time, and have never
seen a window open yet, or the sign of a human about the house."

"come," said florence to the irish girl, and the two stepped from the
carriage, and, crossing the pavement, ascended the steps. the bell
was rung, and, after waiting for a few moments, the door opened, and
a slightly-formed girl, about fifteen years of age, with a singularly
interesting face, inquired their errand.

"does a mrs. jeckyl live here?" asked florence.

"no, ma'am," replied the girl.

"mrs. hawks?" said the companion of florence.

the girl shook her head.

"we were told," said florence, "that a woman bearing one of these names
came to your house about two weeks ago. she was a tall englishwoman,
dressed in black."

"won't you come in and see my mother?" and the girl moved back a pace
or two from the door.

according to the invitation, florence stepped over the threshold and
entered the house, following the girl, who conducted her into the
back-parlor, which was feebly lighted by the rays that came in through
a small opening in the shutters.

"sit down," said the girl, "and i will call my mother." and she passed,
with a gliding motion, noiselessly from the apartment.

the eyes of florence soon accommodated themselves to the feeble light,
and, gazing around the room, she noted its contents with curious
interest. the furniture was meagre and plain, the carpets worn, and the
window-curtains faded. a few articles, which seemed the relics of a
better condition, indicated the possession of taste. while yet engaged
in making these observations, florence, whose eyes had been peering
into the adjoining parlor, the shutters of which were closed tightly,
turned her head and met the steady, penetrating gaze of a woman who had
entered so silently that no sound of footfall had disturbed the air.

this woman was in height a little above the medium stature; of slender
proportions; with an unusually high and broad forehead; faded, almost
sallow, complexion; eyes black as coals, yet bright as fire; lips
arching, thin, and flexible; and a delicate, receding chin. florence
arose, and stood before the woman in momentary confusion, her eyes
drooping beneath her singularly penetrating gaze.

"pardon this intrusion," said florence, with considerable hesitation of
manner. "i am in search of a person who, as i am informed, came to your
house some time within the past two weeks."

the woman requested florence to resume her seat, and then, drawing a
chair in front of her, said, in a low, musical, yet not altogether
pleasant voice,—

"what is the name of the person you are seeking?"

"mrs. jeckyl," replied florence.

the woman shook her head.

"she has gone by the name of hawks, i believe," said florence.

another shake of the head, accompanied by the remark,—

"i do not know any one bearing either name."

"she is an englishwoman, tall of stature."

"ah!" the response was in a quick voice, in which was a shade of
surprise.

"she dressed in black," said florence.

"did you say her name was jeckyl?" asked the woman.

"yes. but i believe she has also gone by the name of hawks."

"was she young, or old?"

"past the middle point of life."

"a woman answering your description was here about two weeks ago, and
remained several days. but her name was fordham."

"another _alias_, no doubt," said florence, in a quickened voice. "and
now, madam, if you will tell me where i can find her, you will confer
an obligation beyond all price."

"is she a relation?" inquired the woman, looking steadily into the
excited face of her young visitor.

"no!" answered florence, with an expression of disgust.

"why do you seek her?" the manner and tone of the woman threw a chill
over the feelings of miss harper.

"the person i seek has, it is feared, enticed away, or stolen, a little
girl, whose mother is almost beside herself in consequence."

"a grave charge to bring against any one," said the woman, seriously.
"i hardly think it can apply to mrs. fordham."

"you know something of her antecedents, then?" florence spoke
inquiringly.

"nothing," answered the woman, almost coldly.

"where can i find her now?"

"i have neither seen nor heard of her since she left my house," said
the woman.

the look of distress that settled on the countenance of miss harper
seemed to awaken a motion of sympathy in the woman's heart.

"whose child is missing?" she inquired, in a soft voice.

"the child of mrs. edward dainty, number 400 —— street; a little girl,
eleven years old. she has been absent since yesterday. the woman
suspected of the crime of enticing her away was employed, a short time
ago, as governess, but dismissed almost immediately, in consequence of
certain defects that entirely destroyed her right influence over the
children."

"what were those defects?" inquired the woman, evincing a new interest
in the matter.

"she attempted, it was thought, to magnetize the children."

"ah!" the woman seemed more interested, and leaned toward florence,
fixing upon her, as she did so, her dark, bright, weird-looking eyes.
there was a brief pause.

"well, what of it?" inquired the woman, seeing that florence remained
silent.

"the consequences were serious, so far as the little girl i refer to
was concerned," said florence. "she was changed almost from the hour
mrs. jeckyl drew her within the sphere of her influence."

"delicately organized, and easily impressed, no doubt." the woman spoke
half to herself.

"she is a sweet, lovely child," said florence, "and it is terrible to
think of her pure, almost infantine spirit coming within the sphere of
such a woman. death, in my regard, would be a blessing instead."

"you speak warmly on the subject," said the woman.

"i have cause to do so, for i feel warmly," said florence.

"you have met mrs. jeckyl, as you call her?"

"no. happily, i never crossed her path. my foot has not touched the
slime of her serpent trail!"

the woman's face darkened, as if a shadow had fallen upon it.

"if the person you call jeckyl, and the one who passed a few days in
my house, are the same," she said, "your language is far too strong.
though she is to me, partially, a stranger, yet i have had testimony
in regard to her of the highest and most authoritative character. i
know her quality as well as if i had seen her heart laid open and read
it like the pages of a book. she belongs to an exceptional class in
the present time. to ordinary people she is unintelligible. the high
purposes of her life are not appreciated by them. she cannot be weighed
in their balance."

the woman spoke rapidly, and with enthusiasm, quick changes running
over her face, and her eyes brightening and darkening by turns like a
stormy sky. a low shudder of fear crept into the heart of florence as
she looked at this woman; and the irish girl who accompanied her, and
who had until now remained standing, moved backward toward the door of
the room, gaining which, as a point of advantage, she said,—

"'deed, and, miss, i think as how we'd as well be going from here."

"stay a moment." and florence reached forth a hand toward the girl.

"i shouldn't wonder if i was riding on a broomstick next!" muttered the
latter, as she receded into the passage.

"don't go, if you please. i will be with you directly." there was a
tremor of anxiety in the tones of florence.

"i will not call in question a word you have said," remarked florence,
speaking in a deprecatory tone, as she turned to the woman. "all i ask
now is that you give me some clue by which i can trace this person from
the time she left your house. that is my errand here; and i beg, in
the name of humanity, that you will satisfy it to the extent of your
ability."

"i asked her no questions when she left," replied the woman. "she came
with a message from an absent one in the upper spheres,—a message
that filled my heart with reverent gladness. as an honored guest, she
remained for a few days an inmate of my house, and then went as she
came. the spirits led her here, and the spirits withdrew her in their
own good time. she is gifted in a high degree; and they have chosen her
as one of their most favored messengers to darkly-wandering mortals. i
bless the day she came to this house. ah! now i see the white garments,
and now the angel-face, of that blessed daughter who ten years ago left
my heart desolate."

the woman's eyes were elevated, and she seemed in an ecstatic vision.

"she removed the veil from my dull eyes,—that honored messenger!" she
continued, "and, by a pure vision, i now see beyond the dark boundary
which conceals the beautiful world where the blessed ones dwell. she
likewise unstopped my ears, so that they can hear spirit-voices. i
hearken to them all day long."

"i call nothing of this in question," said florence, rising, and
moving toward the door; "but other matters of interest press on me
too imperatively for delay. once again, let me implore you to give
me some light. think again! is there no one likely to be informed of
her present home, to whom you could refer me? let your mother's heart
counsel for me in this matter!"

"i trust the spirits in all things. for wise ends they have hidden from
me all that pertains to their favored messenger. she came in mystery,
and departed as she came. in the spirit i meet her almost daily. in the
body i know her not."

the irish girl had already retreated beyond the outer door, and stood
upon the marble steps. hopeless of gaining any information here
touching the object of her search, florence, over whose spirit had
fallen a strange, suffocating fear, as if her very life were waning,
turned from the woman, and almost rushed, panic-stricken, from the
house.

"'dade, and it's the divil's den!" ejaculated the irish girl, bluntly,
as they crowded into the carriage. "i wouldn't go into that house again
for a mint o' money. i expected every instant to see you spirited off!"

florence did not answer the girl, but ordered the driver to leave her
at the house in fifth street and then to take her to the residence of
mr. dainty. she brought neither light, hope, nor comfort to those who
had anxiously awaited her return, and found none for her own troubled
heart.

chapter xviii.

a nest of pseudo-spiritualists.

as florence harper left the room in which the singular and exciting
interview described in the last chapter took place, and fled in strange
alarm from the house, the girl who had admitted her came gliding in
with her noiseless step from the adjoining apartment, and, standing
before the woman, who yet remained in a partially ecstatic condition,
said,—

"oh, mother! this is dreadful!—dreadful!"

"what are you saying, child? what is dreadful? i see beautiful visions,
and hear music of angelic sweetness. i see nothing dreadful. give me
your hands, adele dear."

and she reached forth her small hands, so white and thin as to be
semi-transparent. but the girl stepped back a single pace, eluding the
offered grasp.

"why don't you give me your hands, child?" the woman spoke with some
impatience.

"because i would rather keep them in my own possession just now,"
replied adele, in a low, clear tone, the slight quiver in which showed
a disturbed state of feeling.

"you are perverse," said the woman. "the spirits must be consulted.
there are evil influences at work."

"they are at work in that mrs. fordham, if, as this young lady says,
she has stolen a child!" adele made answer, speaking firmly. "i never
liked her. she's wicked!"

"adele!"

"i believe it, mother." the girl was resolute. "she tried to get me in
her power; but i was able to resist her, thank god!"

"daughter! daughter! what is the meaning of this?" exclaimed the woman,
in surprise and displeasure, rising as she spoke, and advancing toward
adele, with the evident belief that if she could get her hands upon her
she could more effectually bring the full power of her strong will to
bear in subduing her rebellious spirit. but adele retreated into the
next room, saying, in a quick, decided voice,—

"i'm getting heart-sick of all this, mother! there is in it more of
evil than good, i sadly fear. i don't like the people who come here.
some of them may mean all right; but some of them, i know, mean all
wrong; and your mrs. fordham is one of them. and so is mr. dyer. i hate
the very sight of him! he said something to me last night."

"what did he say?" eagerly asked the mother.

"i can't tell you now, because i promised him that i would not. but if
he says it again i'll dash the first thing into his face that i can lay
my hands on."

just then the door-bell rang, and adele answered the summons. the very
man about whom they were speaking entered. the moment adele saw him she
started back, and, running along the passage, escaped from his presence
up-stairs.

"mr. dyer!" said the mother, with a pleased familiarity of manner,
singular under the circumstances, to say the least of it. she gave him
her hand, which he grasped hard, and retained while they walked back
into the darkened parlors.

"mrs. weir!" was his simple response. his tone was low, penetrating,
agreeable. let us describe mr. dyer. it is the countenance that
indicates the man. chin, mouth, nostrils, eyes, forehead,—on these each
one writes his character, though he tries never so hard to play the
hypocrite. the lineaments of the face never lie. but in the present
instance the face was so much hidden by a hairy veil that much of its
true expression was concealed. intellectually, taking his rather low
forehead as a guide, mr. dyer was not a man of superior endowments. but
his small brown eyes, shining out from their hollow recesses, indicated
mental activity and alertness. the skin of his face was colorless,
and had a bleached appearance, all the lines running down, as if it
had been rained upon every day for a dozen years. high up, reaching
nearly to the cheek-bones, the hairy investure began, and that seemed
to have yielded also to the causes which made all the facial lines
perpendicular. it was guiltless of curl, or curving line of beauty, but
shot down, straight and thick, a dark brown mass, wiry and unsightly.
the hair upon his head was long, dry, harsh, and straight, lying like
the mane of some beast upon his shoulders. his full, pouting lips
indicated sensuality. yet even this countenance had been schooled by
a sinister purpose so as to deceive some by its meek expression of
goodness.

mr. dyer was that intellectual, strong-willed woman's plaything,
a biologist,—we use one of the names assumed by a modern sect of
pseudo-spiritualists,—a getter-up of circles, and a leader in the
insane orgies of mesmerism run mad. he was wonderfully given to
trance-ecstasies, and could elevate himself into the highest of the
spiritual spheres in a moment and at will. familiar _tête-à-têtes_
with adam, noah, moses, socrates, washington, and the world's hosts of
worthies and heroes, were had by him daily; and most of them honored
him as the medium of important communications to the world. from some
cause, however, by the time these communications reached the sphere
of nature, they had lost all meaning and coherence. still, mr. dyer
enunciated them with oracular gravity, and many who listened imagined a
deep symbolical meaning.

not possessing that strong, masculine, reasoning mind which gives man
power over man by virtue of superior intellectual force, and yet having
a large share of that bad ambition of which milton's satan was a type,
mr. dyer sought influence over others—females particularly—by means
of modern witchcraft, going from house to house "and leading silly
women captive," and, by his devilish arts, withering or destroying the
budding germs of rational freedom in little children, whenever they
chanced to come within the sphere of his blasting influence. he was one
of a bad class of sensualists, whose active propensities gain power by
cunning and hypocrisy. it was a day of evil triumph with him when he
discovered that he was a "powerful medium," and could subdue by means
of his stronger will the consciousness of sickly, nervous women, and so
control the wonderful organism of their spirits as to make them speak
and act like mere automatons. it was a vast improvement on maelzel and
kempelon!

at the time of his introduction to the reader, dyer had already been
the instrument of promoting four separations between husband and wife.
he was himself a married man; but, having discovered that another, a
handsomer, brighter, and more attractive woman than his lawful partner,
was conjoined to him as to the spirit, and therefore, according to his
reading of the matter, his real wife, he had separated himself from
the heart-broken woman against whom he had committed one of the most
grievous sins in the crowded calendar of human wrongs. in the eye of
the law he was a vagrant, for he had no apparent means of support. but
he managed to get his share of worldly gear from his duped or corrupt
admirers. it was sufficient for some of them that the familiar spirits,
or demons, required their favorite instrument to be clothed and fed and
supplied with needful money.

such was the man whose appearance gave evident pleasure to mrs. weir,
notwithstanding the intimation of her daughter, just made, that his
evil eyes had fallen upon her, and that already his polluting breath
had touched her fair young cheek.

as the two entered the parlors, dyer still holding the woman's hand, he
gazed into her eyes with a fixed look, beneath which her own did not
quail.

"and what have the spirits been saying to you this morning?" he spoke
in a low voice, modulated to musical cadences, and bent his face close
to hers. "i can see, by the lucid depth and strange ethereal brightness
of your eyes, that you have been holding sweet communion with them."

they sat down upon a sofa, and mrs. weir replied,—

"new spheres are opening to me. i am anxious to rise higher, higher,
into more celestial states; but the spirits are ever teaching me
lessons of patience. i am too worldly yet, they say. the dross of this
outer sphere is dimming my fine gold; the stain of earth is on my
garments. their low whispers are lingering yet in my ears, and my soul
feels the hush of a deep tranquillity."

"beautiful! celestial!" and mr. dyer raised his hands in almost saintly
benediction.

"of all this the scoffing world knows nothing," went on mrs. weir,
murmuring in a soft, sweet voice. "it is too gross and sensual, and,
like the swine, tramples on these precious pearls."

"and still, like the swine," added dyer, "turns upon and rends us who
cast them at its feet."

"alas! too true!" mrs. weir spoke almost sadly.

"but the spirits sustain us. their communications are our exceeding
great reward," said dyer, with enthusiasm. "we are not in the world nor
of it, but enjoy the glorious privileges of the immortals."

he leaned closer.

"to the pure all things are pure——"

the door-bell rung, and each gave a start,—a shade of disappointment
clouding the brightness of their faces.

"did you expect another visitor at this time?" asked dyer.

"no," replied mrs. weir, as she listened to the light steps of adele on
the stairs and moving along the passage to the door.

both sat very still, hearkening. a low ejaculation of surprise escaped
the lips of adele. then were heard the rustling of a woman's garments,
and the movement of feet.

mr. dyer and mrs. weir arose as the parlor-door was pushed open.

"mrs. fordham!" exclaimed the latter, as a tall woman in black entered
with a slow, stately step, holding by the hand a shrinking little
girl, who drew back in partial fear at the sight of strangers. close
behind them was adele, her usually quiet face now alive with feeling,
and her glance fixed with eager interest on the beautiful child. she
reached out her hand and said,—

"come, dear!"

but the woman reproved her with a look, and drew the little one closer.

"mrs. fordham! welcome again!" said dyer, giving the visitor his hand.
"you drop down upon us as if from cloud-land. i thought you were far
away. but who have we here?"

and he stooped a little, carefully examining the child's face.

"a prize,—a treasure,—a good gift from our generous spirits," answered
mrs. fordham, as she sat down with the air of one who felt herself at
home, and lifted the child upon her lap. drawing her head down upon her
bosom, she made a pass or two with her hand, and the little girl was
still as an effigy.

"there never was a more impressible subject," said the woman, "nor
one through whom spirits communicate more freely. i saw it in her the
instant my eyes rested on her face. then i consulted the spirits, and
they said that she was born to a high mission. but how was she to be
brought into the sphere of her holy calling? in common language, she
was not mine. i was not the instrument of her birth, and therefore, in
the world's regard, had no right to dispose of her. again i consulted
the spirits. the answer was clear. the bars of custom must be thrown
down, they said. the child was destined to a high use, and human bonds
must not restrain her. for a time the spirit was willing but the flesh
weak. i hesitated, held back, doubted; but clearer and clearer came
the indications. at last all communication was withdrawn from me. i
asked, but received no answer; again and again i called to my old and
dear companions, but not even a faint, far-off echo was returned to my
half-despairing cry. then, and not till then, i yielded. i sent forth
my thought and affection toward this child—this beloved one of the
spirits—and drew her toward me. though distant as to the body, i felt
that my hands were upon her, and that she was approaching. and she came
in good time,—came and threw herself into my arms,—a young devotee to
this new science, a neophyte priestess for service at the altar in
that grand spiritual temple, the walls of which are towering upward to
heaven."

mrs. fordham's eyes gradually assumed an upward angle: a rapt
expression came into her face; her voice was deep and muffled by
feeling.

"precious darling! chosen one! beloved of the angels!" said mrs. weir,
bending over the little girl, who now lay in a trance-sleep against the
woman's bosom.

"will the spirits communicate through her now?" asked dyer.

"let me inquire of them," answered the woman. and she relapsed into a
state of real or apparent cessation of all exterior consciousness. ten
minutes of almost pulseless silence followed, the child still lying in
her strange, unnatural sleep.

"they will speak," said mrs. fordham, in a deep yet hushed tone. then
she laid her hand gently on the colorless face of the child-medium,
and held it there for the space of several seconds. a few light passes
followed. the child caught her breath: there were slight convulsive
spasms of the chest and limbs, while a most painful expression saddened
her gentle face.

"dear child!" murmured mrs. weir.

"it is the strife in her soul of evil spirits against the good," said
mrs. fordham. "she is not yet wholly purified for her great mission.
happily for her, the battle is fought in states of unconsciousness. she
is spared all suffering."

"the spirits love and protect her," said dyer.

"they love and protect their own; and she is theirs," answered mrs.
fordham.

as she spoke, she raised the child to a sitting posture. her eyes were
still closed, and the look of sadness and suffering yet remained. dyer
drew a chair and sat down directly in front of her. mrs. weir took
another and did the same, but arose immediately, and, looking to the
opposite side of the room, said,—

"come, adele; bring a chair and sit down with us."

but adele neither answered nor stirred.

"daughter, did you hear me?" mrs. weir's voice was firmer.

"i do not wish to come into the circle," replied adele.

"don't be foolish, child: come," said mrs. weir.

"no, mother: i wish to be excused."

mrs. weir was moving across the room toward her daughter, when dyer
said,—

"stop, madam! let us consult the spirits."

mrs. weir came back.

"mrs. fordham, ask the spirits about this strange perverseness," said
dyer.

the woman closed her eyes and sat quite still for a minute.

"the spirits require the circle to be harmonized," was mrs. fordham's
decision.

"you must come, adele!" dyer spoke half authoritatively.

but adele stood as firm as marble.

"adele!" mrs. weir's voice, now sharp and commanding, thrilled through
the rooms.

"there are other spirits besides mrs. fordham's familiars, and they
tell me not to harmonize her circle to-day," answered adele, speaking
very calmly, and with meaning emphasis.

"they are evil, lying spirits!" exclaimed dyer, with excitement.

"from the infernal spheres," said mrs. fordham, solemnly. "i am afraid,
mrs. weir, that sirens are seeking to possess your daughter, that they
may utterly destroy her."

"adele, come! flee to us quickly!" cried mrs. weir, in a tremor of
excitement, stretching forth her hands.

"my spirits are true, and i believe them!" answered the girl,
resolutely. and she stood immovable.

"the spirits will not communicate unless the circle is harmonized,"
said mrs. fordham, with ill-concealed impatience.

"let the perverse creature withdraw, then." mr. dyer spoke sharply.

"go!" said mrs. fordham, waving her hand.

but adele stirred not.

"go!" repeated her mother.

there was not a sign of obedience.

"all things must harmonize, or the spirits will not answer. if the girl
will not come into the circle, she must leave the room." it was mrs.
fordham who spoke.

"the spirits tell me to remain, and i will obey them!" said adele, with
unwavering firmness.

"they are bad spirits!" dyer almost thundered out the words, his
pent-up anger and impatience getting the better of his self-control.

"lying spirits!" shrieked mrs. fordham, catching the excitement of the
man.

"who is to decide?" asked adele, calmly.

"heaven's messenger!" said mrs. weir, pointing to mrs. fordham. "it is
through her that the spirits of the higher spheres descend."

"heaven's messengers don't rob mothers of their children!" adele
answered. "if there are lying spirits in the case, they have found
access to her ears, not mine!"

"heavens and earth!" exclaimed dyer, starting to his feet; "what does
the girl mean?"

mrs. fordham's self-imposed calmness all departed, and the fire in her
eyes shot out toward adele like serpent-tongues. with three or four
quick passes, she restored the little girl who sat in her lap to a
half-dreamy consciousness of real things, and then, taking two or three
strides toward the door, said, glancing over her shoulder,—

"the same room, mrs. weir?"

"the same," was answered, and woman and child disappeared from sight.

chapter xix.

the bird and the serpent.

"you needn't stand glowering upon me after that fashion, john dyer!"
said adele, after mrs. fordham and the child had left the room. "i know
you, sir!"

"silence!" was the passionate response, and——

"silence!" was repeated, though in feebler utterance, from the mother
of adele.

"that is a wicked woman!" said the girl, resolutely. "there is a
serpent in her eyes. i saw it when she was last here; and it looks out
with keener venom now. mother, beware of her!—and—" she hesitated a
moment, and then went on, in a bolder tone,—"beware of _him_! there is
an adder in your path: one step more, and it will sting you to death!"

she pointed her finger steadily at dyer, and stood gazing at him until
his eyes fell in confusion. then she passed from the room with rapid
but noiseless feet, gliding away like a spirit.

"an enemy hath done this," said dyer, almost meekly, turning to the
mother of adele. "you have slumbered, i fear, and let the evil one
scatter tares in your field."

"i know not its meaning," sighed mrs. weir. "this morning i noted the
first signs of a perverse temper."

"what were the signs?" dyer looked sharply into her face, reading every
changing lineament, as if he were scanning the pages of a book. there
was slight confusion, and a moment's hesitation, on the part of mrs.
weir. she then answered,—

"i desired to take her hand and lead her up among the beatific
mountains, but she held back. i urged, and she refused. she then
acknowledged having resisted mrs. fordham in the same way when that
honored messenger made my house bright with her presence. oh, it is
distressing me beyond utterance!"

"can you trace the cause?" inquired the man.

"no."

"your sphere is not strong enough."

"who has a stronger sphere than mrs. fordham?" queried the mother. "she
has set her at defiance also: nay, her power of resistance just now
proved more than our combined influence was able to overcome."

"i can do it!" said dyer, after a pause. "leave her in my hands. i
will exorcise the spirits of evil."

"your sphere repels her."

dyer was on the alert again, and his keen glances were upon the face of
his companion.

"has she said so?"

"yes. and you heard her strange language just now."

"well? what further?"

"i have nothing further. we know that antagonistic spheres exist."

"true, true." the man seemed relieved. "she has compared me to a
serpent. but i know my own heart. evil, be thou far from me! come,
angelic purity! as we draw nearer the invisible world we grow more
ethereal, and the coarseness of depraved nature is dissipated in the
fire of divine affinities. to the pure all things——"

the ringing of the door-bell again interrupted their pleasant
communion, and in a few moments they were joined by two
visitors,—females,—who met dyer and mrs. weir in a manner that showed
them to be on terms of close familiarity.

in the mean time the woman fordham had retired with the child to one
of the chambers above, her mind deeply disturbed by the unexpected
incident of adele's opposition to the necromantic rites about being
instituted,—so much disturbed that she was unable to prolong the spell
she wished to throw over the consciousness of the little girl, who
momently became more and more distressingly alive to the strangeness of
her position.

"oh, ma'am," she said, in pleading tones, as the woman shut the door on
entering the chamber, "won't you take me home? mother is crying for me.
i heard her crying all last night. oh, dear! i do want to go home to my
mother!"

"don't fret yourself, child!" replied the woman, a little harshly. "you
shall go home."

"take me home now, won't you? i don't like to be here. you promised me
yesterday that i should go home before night. oh, ma'am, do take me
home now!"

the little clasped hands were raised pleadingly; the husky voice
quivered; the pale face had in it a look of fear and distress that
would have melted any heart not made hard, by selfish passions, as the
nether millstone.

"you shall go home, dear," said the woman, softening her voice and
assuming an affectionate manner. "you shall see your mother to-night."

and she tried to lift her upon her lap, but the child resisted and held
back. then the woman seized her by both arms, and held her firmly,
looking into her eyes, and exerting the serpent's power of fascination.

the child stood still, held by a grip too strong for resistance, but
she let her eyes fall.

"look at me!" commanded the woman. but the glance she hoped to catch
and hold in her weird gaze did not turn itself from the floor.

"look at me! do you hear?" and the woman placed one hand under the
little girl's chin and forced her face upward. but, instead of looking
at the woman, the child shut her eyes.

holding her thus, mrs. fordham commenced with one hand a series of
mesmeric passes; but the child struggled and tried to escape from her.
a blow was evidently meditated, for there was a quick raising of one
hand, accompanied by an angry flash sweeping over the woman's face. but
the cruel purpose was repressed.

"what has come over the girl?" she muttered, impatiently. "am i thus
to be baffled again? i did not look for it here! but down, excitement!
if i would regain my power, it must be through calmness and a resolute
will."

releasing the child, who instantly shrunk away to the farther side of
the room, mrs. fordham assumed an unimpassioned manner, but kept her
gaze steadily resting upon her victim.

the woman sat on the bedside, and the child stood pale, trembling, and
in tears, crouching against the wall directly opposite. every thing
became silent and motionless as death. the child did not look up,
but steadily persisted in avoiding the gaze of her persecutor. but
the powers of evil were too strong: there was an eye upon her that
possessed a charm too potent for her to withstand; she was a frightened
bird struggling, but in vain, against the fascination of a serpent.
one, two, three minutes passed; all remained hushed as if statues
and not living forms were in the room. at last the woman stirred
slightly, as though the inner excitement had struggled through all
restraining bars and shuddered along the surface: her head gradually
bent forward, and her eyes protruded fearfully. and now there was an
apparent relaxation of muscle in the child. evidently, her will was
losing its faculty of resistance. a minute more, and the woman began
approaching, with the stealthy movements of a cat, her eyes still fixed
intently upon the girl. cautiously, and as if in doubt, she laid her
hand against her cheek, touching it lightly. the child did not stir!
she pressed the hand harder: there was no sign of consciousness! she
called: there was no answer!

suddenly a new life seemed thrilling along the woman's veins. her
countenance flushed; her eyes danced in light; her whole person
quivered. stooping over the child, she lifted her with some caution, as
if fearing the spell might dissolve, bore her across the room, and laid
her upon the bed. then she made slow passes above her for the space of
nearly five minutes.

"all right!" she muttered, as a glow of evil triumph warmed her
disfigured face, and her thin lips parted in a demoniac smile. "it was
a hard struggle, but a vain one! there is an opposition of spheres in
this house, and the medium of its activity is adele weir. twice has
she set me at defiance, twice thwarted the spirits. it must not occur
again. am i to be set at naught by a stripling of a girl like this?"

after standing over the unconscious child for some time longer, and
using sundry tests to make sure that she was completely locked in magic
slumber, mrs. fordham turned away, and, passing through the door,
closed it, and was going down stairs, when a slight noise caught her
ear. glancing up in the direction from which it came, she caught sight
of adele watching her from the passage above. it was only a momentary
glimpse; for, on finding that she was observed, adele retired from
sight instantly.

mrs. fordham paused, stood thinking for a little while, and then slowly
returned to the room. she entered and examined the lock on the inside.
it held a key. this was removed and passed into the wards on the other
side.

"thus i make surety doubly sure," she said to herself, again closing
the door, which she locked, placing the key in her pocket. she then
went down to the parlor.

"how is our little trance-medium?" asked dyer, as she entered.

"all right," was answered. "spirits from the lower spheres have battled
hard for her, but the strife was vain. she is safe."

"i congratulate you on the triumph," said mrs. weir, enthusiastically.
"she is a lovely child," was added, with a touch of mother-feeling in
her voice.

"the most remarkable child-medium i have yet seen." mrs. fordham looked
at the two visitors before mentioned. "the communications received
through her are extraordinary. i am taking record of them daily, and
their publication will astonish the world. society is on the eve of
some new developments. it is the night before the morning."

"is she tranquil?" asked mrs. weir.

"entirely so."

"sleeping?"

"all the avenues to her soul are locked, and i have the key," said mrs.
fordham, with triumph in her tones. "hark!" she paused and listened,
her eyes raised to the ceiling. after a few moments of silence, she
went on. "i thought there was a movement in the room above. but it was
imagination, i presume."

"is there no danger of her awakening?" asked one of the visitors.

"none: only the hand that shut the door of her soul's consciousness can
open it again."

"how wonderful is this power!" said the last speaker. "i tremble
sometimes to think what terrible consequences might follow its abuse."

"there is no danger of its abuse," returned mrs. fordham.

"you think not?"

"i am sure of it."

"none but the favored of spirits are intrusted with this power," said
dyer; "and they are protected."

"will not the spirits speak through her to-day?" asked one of the
visitors.

"i do not know. there have been opposing influences; but i trust they
are removed. in half an hour we will go up to where she is lying in
trance-sleep; and perhaps the spirits will move her to utterance."

"is she a speaking or writing medium?" was asked.

"speaking. whenever her lips are unclosed, it seems as if you heard a
spirit talking."

half an hour was permitted to elapse, and then mrs. fordham, dyer,
mrs. weir, and the two visitors passed with hushed footsteps up to the
chamber. at the door mrs. fordham paused, and, speaking to mrs. weir,
said,—

"your daughter must not be permitted to enter. the circle cannot be
harmonized if she is present."

"i will see to it," was whispered back.

the door was then unlocked, and the company entered, each one with
suspended breath. mrs. fordham preceded; but, ere she had gone half
across the room, an exclamation of surprise and disappointment fell
from her lips. the child was not there! in less than half a minute
every part of the chamber was searched; but no sign of the missing one
appeared.

"she may have thrown herself from the window!" said mrs. weir, blank
terror in her countenance at the thought.

the window was opened, but no form lay on the ground beneath.

"where is your daughter?" demanded mrs. fordham.

mrs. weir stepped to the door, and called, "adele!" twice, thrice she
called; but only echo replied.

"it is her work!" exclaimed mrs. fordham, roused to mad excitement.

"impossible!" said mrs. weir. "adele! adele!" her voice went thrilling
through the house.

"search everywhere, from garret to cellar!" mrs. fordham spoke in a
commanding voice, and then went striding up-stairs and sweeping like
a storm from room to room. chambers, attics, lumber-rooms, closets,
cellar, and out-buildings, they searched with scrupulous care; but
neither adele nor the child were found. both had vanished from the
house, leaving no sign.

chapter xx.

the rescue.

"this is going too far," said adele, as she came forward again
and stood in sight of the room where the child lay in its
fearfully-unnatural sleep, after mrs. fordham had gone down to the
parlors to join mrs. weir and her companions. slowly, listening almost
breathlessly, and with silent footsteps, she descended the stairs, and,
approaching the chamber, laid her hand upon the door-knob and turned
and pressed against it. to her disappointment, she found that mrs.
fordham had locked her prisoner in and withdrawn the key.

for a little while adele stood by the door, her face shadowed with
perplexity. she then moved silently away, and, going into her own room,
sat down, with a sober face, to think. the right thought was soon
suggested. starting up with a sudden impulse, she went to the door of
her own apartment and quickly withdrew the key. it fitted the lock, as
she had hoped, and in less than ten seconds she was in the room where
the child lay in its deathlike slumber. carefully shutting the door,
she crossed to the bed. the child had not stirred since mrs. fordham
left the chamber. stooping down, adele gazed upon the pure young face,
until tears blinded her eyes. then, laying a hand upon her, she shook
her gently. but not a sign of life, beyond the feeble respiration,
appeared.

an expression half surprise, half fear, came into the young girl's
countenance; and she stood quite still for an instant. then, laying her
hand again upon the child, she shook her violently, putting at the same
time her mouth to her ear, and saying, in a low but eager voice, "wake!
wake up! come!"

but she might as well have spoken to the dead. the sleeper's senses
were locked by a key that was not in her possession; and so she could
neither find the wards nor spring the bolt.

for a little while adele remained bewildered and irresolute. then she
made a more violent effort to break the spell that shut the doors of
conscious life. it was in vain.

"time flies. it must be done now, or the opportunity may pass forever.
poor child! poor lamb in the wolf's grasp! i must, i will, save you!"

turning from the bed, as she thus spoke with herself, adele left
the room, and, going to her own chamber, hurriedly put on a bonnet
and shawl, and then, coming back, lifted the sleeper resolutely in
her arms, and, bearing her from the apartment, locked the door and
withdrew the key. for a few moments she stood at the top of the stairs,
irresolute as to her next step. then, laying her burden upon the floor,
she went down the first flight and listened. the sound of muffled
voices from the parlor was distinct enough to warn her that one of
the doors at least was open, and that it would be folly to attempt to
leave the house by the front way. there was an outlet back, by means
of a narrow alley leading past a row of small houses into a court, and
thence to a street running parallel with the one on which mrs. weir
lived. but, to reach the yard so as to gain this outlet, adele must
descend the stairway, the foot of which was near the back-parlor, and
pass out by a door opening within a few feet of the parlor-window. this
mode of egress was, therefore, almost as impossible as the first, for
the window she knew was open.

for a little while the excited girl was in despair; and the words, "it
is hopeless," were on her lips, when she thought of a low shed out
upon which she could climb from one of the second-story windows of the
back-building. to think was to act. hurriedly lifting the child, she
passed into the small room over the kitchen, closing the door behind
her, so as not to be seen by any one who might happen to come up the
stairway. the window was raised: a glance at the shed below showed the
distance to be not less than three feet from the window-sill. there
was a low table in the room: on this she laid her burden carefully,
and then drew it to the window. a quick but searching examination of
all the windows overlooking the position she occupied told her that
she was free from observation. next she dropped down lightly upon the
shed, and from thence sprung like an antelope to the yard, full six
feet below, her form disappearing beyond the edge of the slanting shed.
fortunately, there was an old table in the yard, which adele drew up to
the side of the outbuilding, and, mounting thereon, without an instant
of hesitation, clambered to the roof, and gained the window, just
inside of which the child still lay as motionless as if she were dead.
it was only the work of an instant to draw her forth and carry her to
the eaves of the shed, where adele laid her carefully and then leaped
down upon the table below. then she took her in her arms and lifted
her from the shed, and then jumped to the pavement, bearing the heavy
burden still in her arms. almost like a spirit she vanished through
the gate, shutting it noiselessly behind her. hurrying down the long
alley-way and through the court, adele emerged upon the open street. an
omnibus was passing at the moment, and she signed the driver to stop.
it so happened that no passengers had yet entered the vehicle, and
this made her and her insensible companion the sole occupants when it
moved on again. taking the extreme upper end of the seat, she placed
the child in an upright position, so as not to attract the attention of
those who might come in, and supported her with one arm.

the stage moved on for two squares before gaining any accession to the
number of its passengers. then two ladies came in. they looked hard at
adele; also at the child whose face was hidden among her garments. two
men came in next; and then a woman with a little girl. after that, an
elderly man entered. he kept looking up and down the cross-streets,
and glancing at the passengers on the sidewalks, in a curious, anxious
kind of way, as if in search of some one. at last he fixed his eyes on
adele with a gaze so penetrating that it brought the color to her face.
from her he looked to the child crouching down in the corner of the
seat, and kept gazing at the half-hidden form until adele by a slight
movement threw her body farther forward, so as to conceal it still
more from observation.

where was adele going with the rescued child? that question the girl
could not herself answer. escape was the first thing, and flight
the second. the passing omnibus had given the second stage in the
proceeding. all beyond was still in doubt.

one passenger after another left, until only adele with her charge,
and the old gentleman, remained. the curiosity of the latter, it was
plain to the girl, had become strongly excited, and she began to feel
certain that he would not leave the omnibus, nor permit her to do
so, without penetrating the mystery of her sleeping companion. with
stealthy glances she examined his face, in order to gain such limited
knowledge of his character as was possible under the circumstances. her
impression was favorable.

at last the stage reached the exchange, and adele was yet undetermined
what to do or which way to go. the possession of an insensible child
in such a public place would at once attract notice, and probably draw
around her an excited and misjudging crowd. fear was intruding upon her
heart.

the old gentleman stepped forward to pay his fare, and stood just
above her, looking down upon her face and at the child.

"is that little girl asleep?" he asked. the voice was kind, and the
tones assured the heart of adele.

"yes, sir," she answered, timidly.

the old man stooped and laid his hand upon the child. adele bent
forward as if to prevent the closer scrutiny he evidently wished to
make; but he grasped the sleeper firmly and turned her face to the
light. an exclamation of surprise fell from his lips, and he sat down,
drawing, as he did so, with resolute hands, the child from adele's arms.

"girl, how came this child in your possession?" he said, sternly.

"oh, sir!" exclaimed adele, with eagerness, "do you know to whom she
belongs?"

"maddy! maddy! wake up, dear! wake up!" said the old man, turning from
the girl without replying. "what ails her? what is the meaning of this
strange sleep?" he addressed adele again.

"if she belongs to you or yours," said adele, "take her home as
quickly as possible. i have done my part in rescuing the dove from the
hawk,—the lamb from the wolf."

uncle john fleetwood, whom the reader has recognised, needed no further
prompting. he had a carriage called quietly, and, taking into it both
adele and his recovered niece, was driven rapidly to the residence of
mr. dainty. on the way he gained such information as adele permitted
him to glean. it was not by any means satisfactory.

chapter xxi.

the arrest.

"found! found!" the words rang through the house as uncle john entered,
bearing madeline in his arms. her rescuer followed with noiseless
footsteps and gliding motions.

responsive cries of joy and the noise of rapid feet were heard from all
parts of mr. dainty's dwelling; and by the time mr. fleetwood reached
the mother's room an eager crowd surrounded him. tenderly laying
madeline upon the bed, he exposed her pale, sad-looking countenance to
view, the sight of which flooded every face with tears.

"where is the girl?" he asked, imperatively.

"i am here." and adele moved toward the bed

"what is the meaning of this?" he demanded. "what ails our precious
darling?"

"the sleep is mesmeric," answered adele, in her low, musical voice.

"mesmeric!" ejaculated mr. fleetwood.

"mesmeric!" exclaimed mr. dainty, in anger. "who has dared to do this?"

"it was mrs. fordham," replied adele.

"who is mrs. fordham?"

"the woman for whom you were in search," said adele, turning to
florence harper, whom she had recognised.

"mrs. jeckyl!" said florence.

"devil!" almost thundered mr. fleetwood.

"how is this spell to be broken?" asked florence, coming up to adele
and grasping her arm tightly.

"no one can break it but mrs. fordham. she has locked up her senses,
and she alone can open them."

"cannot you do it?" florence asked, eagerly.

"no," was answered, almost mournfully.

"try."

"it is useless." and the girl shook her head.

"did you see it done?" now asked mr. fleetwood, turning from the bed
where he had been vainly trying to arouse madeline to consciousness.

"no, sir. she was alone with the poor little thing."

"you have seen children put to sleep?" mr. fleetwood asked the question.

"oh, yes, sir. often."

"and you've seen them wakened?"

"yes, sir."

"do as you have seen it done, and wake this child if possible."

adele moved forward timidly, and, with evident strong reluctance,
and standing over madeline, commenced making passes with her hands,
beginning at the breast and moving them upward over her face. the
motions were slow at first, but increased in quickness. this was
continued for two or three minutes, but without apparent effect.

"it is of no use," said the girl, stopping suddenly, and as if in
despair. "i have no power. the hand that has been at work here is
stronger than mine. you must get mrs. fordham."

"where is she?"

"at my mother's house."

"where does your mother live?"

"she knows." and adele looked toward florence.

"take florence in the carriage," said uncle john, speaking to mr.
dainty, "and go with her to one of the police-stations and get an
officer. then drive with lightning speed to the house where the girl's
mother lives, and have mrs. jeckyl arrested and brought here."

"come." mr. dainty spoke to florence, who went hurriedly from the room,
and made herself ready in the quickest possible time.

"will you go?" she spoke to adele, appearing in a few moments, ready to
accompany mr. dainty.

"no," was the quiet answer. "it can do you no good; and harm may come
of it to me."

the carriage which had brought mr. fleetwood and adele from the
exchange was still at the door. into this mr. dainty, after giving
his orders to the driver, entered with florence. at the nearest
police-station they obtained an officer, duly instructed to arrest
mrs. jeckyl if she could be found, and then swept rapidly off toward
the northern part of the city. in returning from her previous visit to
the house of mrs. weir, florence had particularly noted the names of
streets and numbers of houses, so that she had no difficulty in giving
the directions needed.

"this is the house," she said, at last, and the officer signed to
the driver to rein up his horses. as when florence paid her first
visit, there was not a sign of life about the dwelling. all the
window-shutters were closed, and the dust lay thick upon the sills and
door-steps. grass sprung in little green tufts from between the bricks
on the pavement, while small mounds of dirt had grown, by daily light
secretions, in the corners where the walls of the house and door-steps
came in contact.

"no one lives here," said mr. dainty, as he looked up at the dwelling
and noted the many signs of desertion.

"it is the house in which i saw that girl," replied florence.

the officer had already rung the bell. he was lifting his hand to ring
a second time, when the door was opened cautiously, and the singularly
striking face of mrs. weir presented itself. on seeing florence, whom
she instantly recognised, she made a movement to shut the door quickly
upon her visitors; but this the strong hand of the officer prevented.
as he pushed it wide open, mrs. weir turned and ran back along the
passage.

"she will give the alarm, and the woman may escape," said florence,
quickly.

at this hint the officer sprung forward, and, grasping her arm tightly,
arrested her progress at the bottom of the stairway. mrs. weir turned
instantly, and fixed her black, glittering eyes upon him.

"what is the meaning of this outrage?" she demanded, in a steady voice.

"no outrage is intended, madam," said mr. dainty, coming forward. "we
are in search of a woman named fordham, who is, as we are informed, in
your house."

"she is not here," was the firm answer.

"where can we find her?" he asked, in a disappointed voice.

"i know not. she comes and goes as the wind; and no questions are asked
as to her coming or going."

"step into this room," said the officer, motioning to one of the
parlor-doors. mrs. weir obeyed, and mr. dainty and florence went in
with her. quick glances were thrown around the apartments, but they had
no other inmates.

"remain here," said the officer. "i will search the house. you stand by
the door, sir, and do not permit any one to pass to the street."

mrs. weir made various signs of rebellion; but the officer warned her
to be quiet, or he would have her taken to the police-station. this
threat really frightened her, and she sunk down, almost nerveless, upon
a chair.

"be quick," said mr. dainty, speaking to the officer. "the woman is
tall, with a thin, sallow, evil face, and dark, wicked eyes. you can
make no mistake."

the officer left the room. it was nearly ten minutes before he came
back.

"she is not in the house," he said, "and i fear has escaped, as i find
an outlet in the rear, leading through a court, into another street."

"i told you that she was not here," said the woman, a gleam of triumph
shooting from her eyes, and her manner exhibiting relief.

"she must be found!" mr. dainty spoke with agitation. "we are on her
track, and only need to persevere. this is one of her haunts; and to
this house my poor child was brought."

"she will in all probability return here," said the officer, "if what
this woman states is true. but if she were really in the house at the
time of our arrival, and made her escape out through the alley and
court i have mentioned, we shall have to search for her in another
direction. my advice is to send the carriage out of the neighborhood.
if the woman should come back and see it standing before the door, she
will take the alarm, and not enter."

"your suggestion is good," remarked mr. dainty. "i will order the
carriage around the square. the driver can wait for us in the next
street." and he went to the door and gave directions accordingly.
returning, mr. dainty said to the officer,—

"shall we all remain here, or will you go for additional aid, so as to
extend the search?"

"i think," replied the officer, "that, as this woman is fully
implicated in a very serious crime, i had better take her to the
police-station. she is evidently a participant in the business, and
shows great anxiety about the escape of her accomplice."

mrs. weir's sallow face changed to a more ashen hue at this suggestion.

"i do not know," added the officer, speaking for effect, "that
bail, under the circumstances, will be accepted. she will no doubt
be imprisoned until all parties in this most horrible outrage are
discovered. her evidence in the case will be of too much importance for
risk of absence, even under bail, to be taken."

"indeed, gentlemen," said mrs. weir, now thoroughly frightened, "i am
innocent in this matter. mrs. fordham, who brought the child here, is
an entire stranger. i never saw her until very recently."

"where is she now? how can we trace her?" demanded the officer.

"i know not. she went as she came, and i asked no questions."

"more the fool for that!" said the officer, coarsely. "but i am afraid
there is as much of the knave as the fool in the present case. right
kind of people are not in the habit of letting suspicious old women,
and total strangers at that, come into their houses and depart at
will, yet asking no questions. the story isn't probable, madam."

"but true, for all," answered mrs. weir. "it is just as i have said.
mrs. fordham came and went, and i asked no questions."

"and why not?"

"because i—i——"

the woman hesitated.

"say on."

"we are commanded not to cast pearls before swine," she replied,
with sudden spirit; "and i shall not cast down things precious to be
trampled under your feet."

"you've got some spice in you, i see," returned the officer, a little
amused. "people in your trade generally have. it requires a full
portion to carry them through."

the woman's face flushed as she said,—

"explain yourself, sir! what do you mean by my trade?"

"oh, that of harboring child-stealing vagabonds and the like! this
seems to have been your last occupation. but i am not here to bandy
sharp words. my business is to find mrs. fordham. if you can direct me
to the place where she now is, well; if not, i must arrest you, and you
will be held in custody until she is produced,—perhaps longer."

the woman's face turned pale again.

at this moment the bell rung. mrs. weir stalled up and was moving
toward the door.

"excuse me, madam," said the officer, laying his hand upon her arm;
"but i will attend the door."

and he drew her firmly back. she made a slight resistance, but the
officer held her tightly for an instant.

"take her in charge, if you please," he said to mr. dainty, "while i
see after this visitor."

mr. dainty did not hesitate. grasping her arm, he said, sternly,—

"let us have no trifling! this business may cost you dear. complicity
in crime is no light matter, i can tell you."

the officer was now at the street-door. as he opened it, a tall woman
in black, answering in all respects to the description of mrs. fordham,
stood ready to enter.

"walk in, madam," he said.

but she stood still, with her keen eyes reading every lineament of his
face. she was not satisfied with its expression.

"walk in," repeated the officer.

"no, i thank you. please say to mrs. weir that mrs. fordham would like
to see her at the door for a moment."

"mrs. weir is engaged," was the officer's reply.

"has her daughter returned?" queried mrs. fordham.

"yes."

"ask her to step here."

by this time mrs. fordham had retreated a little, and the officer,
seeing that she was about descending the steps, moved suddenly forward,
and, throwing one arm around her waist, drew her with a sudden jerk
into the passage and shut the door. the movement was so quick, and so
unexpected, that the woman was taken entirely off of her guard.

"you are arrested for child-stealing!" said the officer, ere she had
recovered from her surprise.

"it is mrs. jeckyl!" exclaimed florence, appearing at the parlor-door.

"mrs. jeckyl! oh, wretch! wretch!" said mr dainty, who had released
mrs. weir, and now confronted the thoroughly-alarmed woman, who, seeing
herself completely in the power of these two men, gave up without a
struggle.

"shall i go for the carriage?" said the officer.

"yes, immediately. but, stay! let me call the carriage, while you hold
your prisoner in charge."

"what are you going to do?" demanded mrs. jeckyl, with regaining
self-possession, as mr. dainty left the house.

"my business," replied the officer, "is to make this arrest. what
follows will depend on the character of evidence which may be produced
against you."

"at whose instance is the arrest made?"

"at the instance of mr. dainty, whose child you abducted."

"i must know your authority!" the woman was growing bolder.

the officer merely took a metal star from his pocket and fastened it
against his breast.

the effect was instantaneous. the woman's eye quailed beneath his
steady gaze.

"come," said the officer, as the carriage was heard rattling to the
door. she hesitated, but moved as she saw his hand rising to grasp her
arm.

"do you wish the other woman arrested, also?" inquired the officer, on
meeting mr. dainty at the door. "she is without doubt an accomplice."

"i only want this woman now," said mr. dainty. "if the other is needed
we can send for her."

"but will hardly find her," muttered the officer. mr. dainty did not
heed the remark. he was too eager to have mrs. jeckyl conveyed to his
dwelling to pause on any other considerations. entering the carriage
with mrs. jeckyl, florence, and the officer, he ordered the driver to
take them to his residence in the quickest possible time. heeding the
injunction, the driver put the whip upon his horses, and dashed rapidly
away.

chapter xxii.

breaking the spell.

it was more than an hour from the time mr. dainty and florence left to
go in search of mrs. jeckyl, before they returned, bringing the woman
with them. during all that period not a sign of life, beyond a feeble
heart-beat, did madeline exhibit. mrs. dainty was almost wild with
distress, and sat over her child, weeping and wringing her hands. agnes
was calmer, but in deep grief; while uncle john moved about the chamber
in which madeline lay, as restless as an unshrived ghost. adele sat by
the bedside, her face bent down, and hidden from view. occasionally
uncle john or mr. dainty would ask her a question. then she would look
up, exhibiting a pale countenance, and answer in a low voice that was
touchingly sad.

many times had both the mother and mr. fleetwood renewed their efforts
to break the fearful spell that lay upon the unconscious child. an age
of suspense they endured until mr. dainty's return.

at last a carriage was heard at the door. uncle john went to the window.

"they have come!" he said, greatly excited, as he saw mr. dainty step
to the pavement. "there is an officer!" he added. "and there is mrs.
jeckyl! oh, the wretch! yet how glad i am to see her!"

breathless expectation followed. adele arose from her place by the
bedside, and shrunk away into a remote part of the room; while agnes
came nearer to madeline, and laid her hand upon her. the mingled sounds
of voices and footsteps were heard along the passage and on the stairs,
and then the chamber-door opened, and mr. dainty entered, followed by
mrs. jeckyl, the officer, and florence.

on the stern face of the woman sat a dark, defiant scowl. she looked
at mrs. dainty, at agnes, and at uncle john, with unflinching eyes,
but did not speak. quick glances were then thrown about the room, and
adele, half hidden by one of the window-curtains, was only partially
seen, but not recognised.

"for what purpose am i here?" she asked, looking at mr. dainty.

"simply to undo your evil work," he replied. "you see that child?" and
he pointed to the bed.

mrs. jeckyl turned her eyes upon the form of madeline, though scarcely
moving her head.

"well, what of her?" she spoke, very coldly.

"she lies there wholly insensible, as you can see."

"i am not a physician," the woman retorted, with a sneer. "why don't
you send for your doctor?"

"right for once!" said uncle john. "why was not that thought of
before?" and he went quickly from the room, and gave direction to one
of the servants to go with all possible speed for the doctor.

"this is your work, as we are told," mr. dainty replied, in answer to
mrs. jeckyl's remark. "and you are here to unbind what you have bound.
and i pray you, in heaven's name, to do it speedily!"

mrs. jeckyl laughed a low, gurgling, malignant laugh.

"you give me credit for more than i claim," said she. "i know nothing
of your child. if she is sick, call in your physician, as i have
already suggested."

at this moment there was a sudden rustling of the window-curtain, and
adele came forward into the room, her eyes fixed steadily on the face
of mrs. jeckyl, and her young lips compressed and resolute.

"you do know something of the child." she spoke out boldly. "for you
brought her to my mother's house. her present condition is the work of
your hands, and you can restore her in a moment if you will."

mrs. jeckyl's countenance grew almost livid with rage; and she glared
at adele, as if seeking to blast her with her burning eyes. but the
young girl stood without a quailing glance, and looked up steadily into
her face.

"it is as i say, and you know it." there was no sign of fear or
embarrassment in the voice of the brave young girl.

"then act quickly!" said mr. dainty.

"oh, mrs. jeckyl, help us if you can! break the spell that rests on our
dear child!" mrs. dainty clasped her hands and spoke imploringly.

but the woman stirred not from the place where she stood.

"she can do it if she will." it was adele who spoke, and her voice was
clear and confident.

mrs. jeckyl again scowled upon her, like a wild animal at bay.

"i have sent for the doctor," said mr. fleetwood, returning to the
room where the excited family stood hovering around the bed on which
madeline lay. "we were simpletons not to have done this before. my
faith is stronger in him than in this impostor. it will be found, i
think, that madeline's unnatural sleep is the effect of some drug, or
of fright, or injury."

a grim smile parted the lips of mrs. jeckyl.

"she can bring her to in a moment, if she will," persisted adele. "i've
seen such things done many, many times."

"no one asked you for information," said mrs. jeckyl, turning in an
excited manner toward the girl.

"this is mere trifling," spoke out the police-officer, sternly, and he
advanced to the side of mrs. jeckyl. "why was she brought here?" and he
looked toward mr. dainty.

"to remove from this child the spell she has cast upon her through some
infernal art."

"so i understood. very well, madam, let it be done at once."

mrs. jeckyl stood, in evident debate with herself, for some moments.

"if i do as you desire, what then?" she addressed mr. dainty.

"quick! quick! mrs. jeckyl!" now broke in mrs. dainty. "oh, save my
child! she will die! break this terrible sleep!"

"i will do it only on one condition," said the woman.

"name it," replied mr. dainty.

"i am now in the hands of an officer?"

"you are; and arrested on the serious charge of child-stealing."

"the condition is this: that i be permitted to leave your house, and
that no effort be made to arrest me after my departure."

"make no conditions with her," spoke out mr. fleetwood.

"as you like," answered the woman, coldly.

"i am not sure that i can make conditions now," said mr. dainty. "you
are already in the hands of the law."

"then i will not touch your child. she may sleep until the day of doom,
for me! and she will sleep until i choose to awaken her."

"wretch! fiend! devil!" ejaculated uncle john, moving about the room,
greatly excited.

"thank you!" said mrs. jeckyl, with a quiet sneer.

mr. dainty now drew the police-officer aside, and held a low, hurried
conversation with him.

"restore this child, if it is in your power to do so," said the latter,
turning from mr. dainty and approaching mrs. jeckyl.

"only on the terms i have stated," replied the woman, resolutely.

"i will suffer you to depart from here alone."

"that will not do. i must have an honorable pledge that no attempt will
be made to arrest me after i leave."

"i shall make no attempt, but simply report what has been done," said
the officer. "if the chief of police again issues orders for your
arrest, they will be obeyed."

the woman thought for some moments.

"i may depart at will?" she said, looking from the officer to mr.
dainty.

"yes." both replied.

she moved to the bedside, uncovered the face of madeline, and stood
for nearly a minute gazing down upon it. all was still as death in the
room, and hearts beat in muffled measure. repressed excitement was
intense. then the woman laid her hands upon the child's temples, and
held them there almost a minute longer, then took both of her hands
and clasped them within her own, seemingly to impart the warmth of
her own body. after that she began a few slow, upward passes, which
were gradually increased in rapidity. a slight convulsive start was
the first sign of returning animation; a shudder next ran through the
child's frame; then she moaned plaintively. the anxious group, now
bending around the bed, held their breaths. mrs. dainty was close
beside mrs. jeckyl, and the face of florence harper hung over madeline,
a little way from that of the necromancer. now there came the flush
of quickening pulses into the child's face; now its expression began
changing to one more pleasant to look upon; now a feeble smile played
around the arching lips; and now the lids unclosed, opening slowly, as
if just overcoming the pressure of a sweet slumber, and revealing the
bright blue eyes beneath.

at this instant the face of mrs. jeckyl was withdrawn.

"mother! oh, mother! dear mother!" said madeline, stretching up her
arms and clasping the neck of mrs. dainty, who in turn threw her arms
around the child, caressing her in the wildest manner, and almost
devouring her with kisses.

"be calm, madeline, for heaven's sake!" whispered uncle john in the
ears of his niece.

"oh, i have had such a terrible dream!" said madeline, sobbing, her
face still hidden in her mother's bosom.

"all leave the room but florence and her mother," said mr. fleetwood,
in a whisper. "this crowd will only excite her mind. if she thinks it
all a dream for the present, so much the better."

acting on this hint, all retired but florence and mrs. dainty. mrs.
jeckyl was not with them. she had already glided from the chamber,
passed down the stairs, and was now hurrying away from the house with
footsteps quickened by fear. the officer kept his word, and permitted
her to escape.

chapter xxiii.

the angel stronger than the demon.

"i have wronged you, miss harper," whispered mrs. dainty.

it cost the weak, proud woman an effort to make this acknowledgment.
but madeline's arms were around both of their necks, and the child was
clinging to both with a half-trembling eagerness. this confession made
all the rest easy.

"return to us," she added, "and be to my children what you once were."

"do come back again!" it was the pleading voice of madeline. "oh, i
wish you had never gone away!"

florence felt a shudder run through the child's body, as if some
fearful image had been presented to her mind.

"say you will come back, and take your old place, miss harper," urged
mrs. dainty.

the arm of madeline which was around her mother's neck withdrew itself
and joined the arm that circled the neck of florence.

"say yes! do say yes, miss harper!" and the child's clasping arms were
drawn very tightly.

"yes," said florence, as she kissed the child.

"oh! i am so glad! so glad!" cried madeline, overcome with joy at this
concession. "if you had never gone away!"

"we will be friends," said mrs. dainty, taking the hand of florence
harper and pressing it warmly. "i did not understand you before. but i
see clearer to-day."

"let the past be forgotten," answered florence. "all are liable to
misconception. i was faithful to your children; and i will be so again."

then, whispering into the ears of mrs. dainty, she added,—

"i fear we are exciting madeline beyond what is prudent."

"you are right," answered the mother. "we are forgetting ourselves."

madeline was still on the bed. gently disengaging the arms that were
around her neck, florence looked smilingly into the face of madeline,
and said, in a cheerful tone,—

"come, maddy dear! you're wide enough awake now, after a long sleep."

"how long have i been asleep?" the child asked, curiously, glancing,
as she spoke, toward the windows. "is it morning?"

"no: the day is nearly done. it lacks scarcely an hour to sunset."

"is it so late?" madeline looked serious, and her face passed from
transient light into shadow.

"yes. you have slept a long time. but come, dear, you must get dressed
for tea."

madeline looked up at miss harper with a kind of vague wonder in her
countenance, and then let her eyes wander slowly about the room, as if
searching for some person or object.

"haven't i been away from here, miss harper?" she inquired, looking at
florence.

"why do you ask that question?"

"i'm sure it isn't all just a dream. that mrs. jeckyl! oh, dear! i feel
so strangely!" and madeline laid her hand upon her breast.

"don't think of any thing, dear, but the happy present," said florence,
smiling into the little girl's face.

but the eyes of madeline were filling with tears, and their expression
had become very sad.

"oh, it was so dreadful!"

"what was dreadful, maddy?" her mother asked.

"i don't know," she answered, in a bewildered manner. "i saw it all
just now; and now it's gone again."

"what is gone, love?"

"i thought she was going to kill me." the child spoke as if to herself.

"who, maddy?"

"it was mrs. jeckyl. she had me in a room. oh, dear, mother! i don't
know what's the matter with me!"

and the child shuddered, while an expression of almost abject fear came
into her face.

"you are safe at home, my love," said mrs. dainty, in a soothing voice.
"there is no mrs. jeckyl here, but kind miss harper instead. and she is
going to stay with us."

"that's best of all," replied madeline, partially recovering herself,
and looking up into the face of miss harper. "i was so sorry when you
went away and that dreadful woman came in your place."

"won't you rise now?" said florence, taking madeline by the hand and
drawing her gently upwards. the child yielded, and sat erect in bed.
mrs. dainty brought a frock, and a change of under-clothing, and both
she and florence busied themselves in removing the soiled garments of
madeline and replacing them with such as were fresh and clean. the
excitement of all this quickened and diverted her mind. when fully
attired, and ready to join the anxious, expectant family, florence said
to her,—

"i think your father and uncle john are in the sitting-room. shall we
go down?"

she held out her hand. madeline drew back for a moment.

"come, dear?" florence spoke cheerily. "i know uncle john wants to see
his pet."

madeline took the hand of miss harper, who led her down-stairs and into
the sitting-room. mr. dainty, old mr. fleetwood, agnes, and little
george were there. miss harper gave each a warning glance, which was
understood.

"wide awake, pet?" said uncle john, in a cheerful, affectionate voice.
"what a nice long sleep you have had!"

mr. dainty and agnes avoided any remark, or, indeed, any exhibition
of more than common interest. george ran up to madeline, kissed her
lovingly, and drew his arm around her waist. but he had been cautioned
by his sister, and so made no allusion to recent exciting events.

"georgie," whispered madeline, putting her lips close to her brother's
ear, "miss harper is coming to live here again."

"is she?" responded the little boy, with a suddenly illuminated face.

"yes, indeed. a'n't you, miss harper?" and madeline looked up into the
face of her governess.

"if you want me?" was the smiling reply.

"oh, that's grand!" said george, striking his hands together and
jumping a foot from the floor. "did you hear that, uncle john?"

"hear what?" asked the old gentleman.

"miss harper is coming back again!" answered the boy. "oh, i'm so glad!"

mr. fleetwood threw an almost grateful look upon florence, as he said,—

"you have friends here, miss harper. children are no hypocrites."

"if this is true, as i hope it is, let me welcome you with a most
sincere welcome," said mr. dainty, coming forward and giving his hand
to florence.

mrs. dainty entered at the moment. she had lingered in the chamber
after florence left.

"it is true," she spoke out, with womanly frankness. "i have asked her
to return, and she has kindly consented. we shall all know each other
better in time, i hope."

the flushed cheeks, drooping eyes, and unsteady lips of miss harper
showed emotion, not triumph; and no eye that then read her countenance
mistook its true expression.

uncle john thanked his niece with his eyes, but said nothing.

"a'n't you glad? i am!" and george danced about the room, in his wild,
impulsive way. "hurrah for miss harper, and death on old snakes!"

young america was losing himself.

"georgie! georgie?" agnes spoke in warning and reproof. mr. dainty
raised his finger; and uncle john said, "hush?" but the boy's blood was
up, and he rattled on:—

"but didn't i give it to her just now? didn't i make her mad, though?
old snakes! i reckon they heard me round the corner. if she comes here
again, i'll shoot her! old rip! old hag! old snakes!"

"george! stop this instant!" said mr. dainty, in a stern voice.

"was _she_ here?" asked madeline, her face growing suddenly pale.

agnes took the boy's hand and led him away.

"come with me to the school-room," said florence, with sudden
animation. "i want to see how it looks there." and she drew madeline
toward the door. "we had some pleasant times there, hadn't we, maddy?
do you remember the stories i used to tell?"

they were already in the passage.

"oh, yes, indeed!" was answered. "and they were such beautiful stories!"

"would you like to hear another? i know a great many," said florence.

"if you please, miss harper. i always love to hear your stories; they
make me feel better."

"oh, it looks as natural as can be!" said florence, speaking with
animation, as she entered the study-room. "here is my arm-chair, just
in the old place. there! i am in it again, feeling quite at home and
comfortable."

"and i am in my little chair, close by your side, and waiting for
a story," said madeline, who was already feeling the spirit of her
companion and true friend as well as teacher.

"the story, is it?" and florence bent down and left a kiss upon the
sweet, upturned face. "very well: my promise shall be kept. now, let me
think: what shall the story be?"

miss harper lifted her eyes, and sat thoughtful for some moments. then,
reaching her hand toward a table that stood near, she took up a bible,
saying, as she did so,—

"i used to read you some of the stories in this precious volume, and i
think you always loved to hear them. shall it be a bible story now?"

florence was looking down upon the face of her pupil. its expression
suddenly changed into one of strong repugnance, and, with an impatient
gesture she said,—

"no! i don't want to hear a bible story!"

florence was shocked by the tone and manner of the child more than by
her words.

"not a story from the divine book, maddy dear?" she said, in a voice
touched by an irrepressible sadness. "oh, you cannot mean what you have
said! angels are present with us in the holy word; and they bring to
our souls peace and happiness. let me read to you about the birth of
our saviour in bethlehem."

miss harper opened to the second chapter of matthew: as she did so,
madeline turned her head away. miss harper began,—

"now, when jesus was born——"

the instant these words reached the ears of madeline, she sprung upon
the volume in the hands of miss harper, and would have torn the open
pages, if she had not been prevented. her countenance was flushed
almost to congestion, and her eyes gleamed with an evil light.

"don't read that! i won't hear it! i hate it!" she exclaimed,
passionately.

florence felt a cold shudder run through her frame. very still she sat,
and silent, holding the hands of madeline. for nearly a minute the hush
as of death pervaded the room. then she released the passive hands she
held, and laid one of her own upon the child's head, smoothing the soft
hair with a gentle pressure.

"once—it is not many years ago—there was a dear little baby." the lips
of florence were close to the ears of madeline, her voice was very low,
the tones even and tenderly modulated. "i do not think there was ever a
sweeter baby born into the world. it had the roundest of rosy cheeks,
that were softer than any velvet; eyes as blue as spring's first
violets; and rich brown hair clustering, in the tiniest little curls
that ever were seen, all over its head. as this beautiful baby lay in
its mother's arms, it looked like a cherub more than like an earth-born
baby."

florence paused, for madeline had placed both hands over her ears, so
that not a word could reach the sense of hearing. she waited, with
forced calmness, until the hands were removed. madeline did not look up
into her face, but kept her eyes resting on the floor.

"there were other attendants on that baby, besides those visible to
human eyes."

the hands of madeline were raised quickly, but the closing words of the
sentence arrested the movement.

"the mother did not see them; the father did not see them: but still
they were there."

the hands of madeline began to fall, and her ear slightly turned,
listening, toward florence.

"i said they were not visible to human eyes," resumed miss harper.
madeline looked up, beguiled into wonder. "but they were as really
present, and as near the baby, as its parents. no,—not both of them."
the last sentence was spoken in a changed tone, as if it involved some
special meaning.

"not both? who were they?" asked madeline, her interest beginning to be
excited.

"the one that stood near the babe," said miss harper, "had the form of
a beautiful woman just passed upward from sweet young girlhood. her
countenance was lovelier, and purer in expression, than that of any
face ever seen by you in a picture. she bent over the babe with clasped
hands, gazing down upon it with looks of wondering love; and when it
smiled her face grew suddenly radiant. the other," (miss harper's voice
fell lower, and took on a graver tone,) "stood in a distant corner
of the room, almost crouching down, as if held there by some superior
power. very different was she from the pure being who bent over the
child. her face wore a frowning, malignant expression, instead of
curling golden hair gracefully falling around her neck and upon her
shoulders, dark, tangled locks stood out from her head, or crept down
over her face, like serpents."

"who were they?" asked madeline, now thoroughly interested.

"one was the baby's guardian angel; the other, an evil spirit."

madeline raised her eyes to the face of miss harper with looks of
deeper wonder.

"the angel's presence," resumed florence, "was alone sufficient to hold
that evil spirit, who wished to hurt the tender babe, at a distance;
just as good affections in our hearts have power to hold the bad and
selfish ones so far away that they can do us no possible harm. day by
day that infant grew larger, and brighter, and happier; but never for
a moment did the angel remove, nor for a moment cease to spread around
the babe a sphere of tender love, of innocent and holy calmness. and
the mother, and all who drew near to look upon the babe or to hold
it like a precious thing in their arms, felt this angelic sphere as
something tender, pure, and loving."

"but what of the bad spirit?" asked madeline, with increasing interest.

"the bad spirit," answered florence, "remained also, and its evil eyes
were always upon the babe. but the presence of that celestial being
kept her ever at the same distance, and seemed to hold her there, as if
by a powerful arm. she could not draw near to the babe, nor even make
it aware of her presence.

"day by day the child continued to grow and to become more beautiful,
until four months of its sweet life had passed. still the angel and
the bad spirit kept unweariedly their guard over and watch upon the
babe. occasionally a slight shade would now cross the angel's face, and
always at the same instant a gleam of pleasure would lighten the dark
countenance of the watchful fiend."

"a fiend, miss harper?" there was a slight pallor on the face of
madeline, and the interest it expressed was verging on to the painful.

"i will call one a fiend, as i call the other an angel. to do good is
angelic, while to do evil is fiendlike. none but a fiend could take
pleasure in doing harm to an innocent babe. well, as i was saying,
after this darling baby was a few months old, the angel's face would
at times be shadowed; and then a gleam of malignant pleasure would
flash over the countenance of the attendant fiend. and now i will tell
you the reason. do you wish to hear?"

"oh, yes, miss harper! tell me the reason," answered madeline, all
attention.

"the babe, even as early as i have said, displayed an evil temper. it
grew angry, pushed its mother away, and resisted her. this troubled the
guardian angel, and this it was that gave the fiend delight. but these
fits of passion were but transient, passing away as the morning cloud
and the early dew, under the sunny influence of that blessed guardian
angel. the fiend was still repelled,—still kept at a distance. but she
wearied not with waiting. she knew that her time would come,—that the
angel would not always have power to hold her in the distance."

miss harper paused, and looked into the face of madeline. there was
something in its deeply-interested expression that a little puzzled her.

"shall i go on?" she asked.

"the fiend didn't hurt the baby, miss harper? the angel didn't go
away?" her voice was earnest almost to eagerness.

"the angels never leave us of their own accord. we drive them away,
and then, instantly, evil spirits take their places. this is so from
childhood, even to old age. it was so with the baby of whom i am
telling you; it is so with your brother georgie now; so with you; so
with me; so with every one. we choose our own companions, always; and
they are evil or good. no angel can be near to us when we are angry
with our brother, when we hate, when we are selfishly seeking our own
pleasure in a total disregard of others; and the moment these bad
affections push the angel attendants away, evil spirits draw near, and
by their malignant power increase our anger, hate, and selfishness,
and make us wretched in consequence; for bad passions always produce
unhappiness."

madeline looked very serious,—almost sad.

"is it so with all of us?" she asked, in a low voice.

"it is so with all of us, dear. but shall i tell you more about this
baby?"

"yes."

"no, maddy, the evil spirit was not permitted to do the baby harm: the
loving angel appointed to be the guardian of its infantile life did not
depart."

"but you said that the bad spirit knew that her time would come?"
interrupted madeline.

florence sighed. "am i bearing her beyond her depth?" she said,
questioning with herself. there was a moment or two of silence. then
she resumed:—

"the baby had a good mother, and to her mind the angel was all the
while suggesting right ways of influencing her precious darling; and
so, as the babe grew older, its mind clearer, and its experience wider,
that loving mother was a partner with the angel in guarding it from
evil and in sowing in its young mind the seeds of goodness. now, maddy,
just think for a moment of the mind of a babe as a garden all prepared
in the spring-time for seeds. if true thoughts and gentle and good
affections are sown in this garden, good and beautiful plants will
spring up; but, if false thoughts and bad affections are scattered upon
the ground, poisonous weeds will grow. you can see that?"

"oh, yes," answered madeline.

"well, as i was saying, the baby had a good mother; and she sowed good
seeds in its infantile mind, and as these began to grow the angel saw
pure and beautiful things there, and so kept very near. if weeds had
been suffered to spring up in this garden and hide or destroy the
heavenly plants, the angel would have been repelled by these evil
things, while the bad spirit, seeing in them what was delightful, would
have approached, and hurt the baby by stimulating them to a more rapid
growth. do you understand my meaning?"

"i think so."

"one of the first things that was taught to this baby, as its mind
began to open, was the existence of god."

florence spoke low and reverently, while her eyes were fixed upon the
countenance of her attentive listener. she saw a slight impulse strike
the child's features, and a flush of sudden feeling veil them.

"of that good god who had sent his pure angel to be its guardian," she
added, in a still lower and more reverent voice.

the light returned again to madeline's face.

"‘how shall i do this?' asked the mother, in her own heart; and the
reply came. she did not know that it was the angel's voice that gave
the wished-for answer. so she took the little one's hands in hers one
evening, clasped and raised them upward, and said, ‘god bless little
amy.' the baby was too young to repeat the words of her mother, or even
to comprehend their full meaning; but the angel, who bent very near,
breathed a holy feeling into her tender spirit, and she had a faint
impression of something higher than the visible, and up to which she
might look for blessing. how sweetly the angel smiled at this! how
darkly frowned the watchful fiend! the first idea of god was given;
and that was a great gain, for the angel could now be more intimately
present with the child in this idea. so far the angel was triumphing
over the fiend."

"are angels present with us when we think of god?" asked madeline,
interrupting miss harper, and speaking with the manner of one who felt
an interest in the question.

"if we think of him reverently, they are."

"how, reverently, miss harper?"

"as great, and good, and holy," said florence; "for then we shall
desire to be like him, and angels are always present with us when we
desire to be good."

"and do they help us to be good?"

"always. to them it is the most delightful of employments."

the eyes of madeline drooped. she sighed faintly, and remained silent.
florence waited for some moments, and then went on, speaking slowly and
impressively:—

"tenderly loved and wisely guarded, the first moons of the baby's life
waxed and waned, and at last a golden year of its life was completed.
the idea of god, once conceived in the child's mind, grew daily into a
more distinct impression. her guardian angel never let that first, best
impression become dim, and the good mother was a co-worker with the
angel.

"‘mamma, read,' said little amy, one day. she was just beginning to
repeat a few small words. the best book in the world was lying on the
table, close by the mother's side, and she turned to it and let her
eyes rest upon the open page. then a strange thing happened. both the
angel and the evil spirit drew near to the child. tender interest
and holy love were on the face of the angel; anger, hate, and fierce
determination on the countenance of the fiend. the angel knew that
every sentence from the holy book that entered the child's mind and
fixed itself in her memory would remain there, a link in the chain by
which her spirit might be joined to heaven; and the fiend knew that
just in the degree that her mind was filled with the holy precepts
and divine narratives of the bible would she pass harmless through
the trials and temptations of her future life and rise superior to
the powers of darkness. and so the angel bent with the tenderest
solicitude over the child, while the evil spirit strove to disturb
her mind or awaken in it some evil passion. but the influence of good
was strongest, and as the mother read the little one leaned her head
and listened with fixed attention. thus she read:—‘now, when jesus
was born in bethlehem of judea, in the days of herod the king, behold
there came wise men from the east to jerusalem, saying, where is he
that is born king of the jews? for we have seen his star in the east,
and are come to worship him.' the evil spirit could not abide in the
presence of this word of truth, as it entered the mind of an innocent
little child, and so retired to a distance, almost writhing in hatred
and pain. the mother read on:—‘when herod the king had heard these
things, he was troubled, and all jerusalem with him. and when he had
gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he
demanded of them where christ should be born. and they said unto him,
in bethlehem of judea, for thus it is written by the prophet: and thou,
bethlehem, in the land of juda, art not the least among the princes of
juda, for out of thee shall come a governor, that shall rule my people
israel. then herod, when he had privily called the wise men, inquired
of them diligently at what time the star appeared. and he sent them to
bethlehem, and said, go and search diligently for the young child, and
when ye have found him, bring me word, that i may come and worship him
also. when they had heard the king, they departed; and lo! the star
which they saw in the east went before them, till it came and stood
over where the young child was. when they saw the star, they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy. and when they were come into the house, they
saw the young child, with mary his mother, and fell down and worshipped
him; and when they had opened their treasures they presented unto him
gifts,—gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.'"

florence had triumphed; for madeline was listening to this story of the
nativity with deep attention. and so she kept on, repeating from memory
the whole chapter.

"and now," continued florence, "not a day passed in which that innocent
little one did not ask her mother to read; and the mother read to her,
at least once every day, some story from the bible, so that, as she
grew older, her memory was full of precious histories, in the thought
of which her guardian angel could be present with her. she loved to
hear of little samuel; of joseph, who was sold into egypt by his
brethren; and of the blessed saviour, who went about doing good.

"and the child grew, and grew, until babyhood was passed and the
sweetness of infancy gave place to a more earnest life. but always the
day opened or closed with some lesson from the holy book; and, when
that was read, the angel drew very near to the child, while the fiend
shrunk afar off. no matter how many selfish feelings the evil spirit
had been successful in awakening through the day, thus grieving the
watching angel; when the bible was read her power was gone, and she
shrunk away in fear from its divine brightness.

"and, still as the child grew, her mother taught her to pity the poor,
the sick, and the suffering, and to find pleasure in doing kind offices
instead of only desiring to have good things for herself. in all these
teachings the angel was very near, helping the mother, and overcoming
the fiend's influence, which was ever active. often it happened that
the fiend would approach the child in an unguarded moment, and fill
her mind with selfish thoughts or stir her heart with an evil passion.
for a little while she would have power over her; but the angel had a
dwelling-place in the child's mind, and, entering, would subdue the
enemy and cast her out. what was that dwelling-place, madeline?"

miss harper looked lovingly into the face of her earnestly-listening
pupil.

"i don't know," was answered.

"shall i tell you?"

"oh, yes. i wish to know."

"why?"

madeline did not answer.

"would you like angels to have a dwelling-place in your mind?"

"oh, yes, miss harper."

"that dwelling-place," said florence, very impressively, "was formed of
the blessed words of truth she had learned from the bible. into these
the angel could enter and abide; and she did enter, and by the power of
celestial love drove out the fiend."

"long years afterward," continued florence, "when the child, grown to
be a woman, had taken her place in the world as one of its actors,
meeting its cares, trials, crosses, and temptations, she was able to
overcome in all the life-battles she was called to fight. evil spirits
assailed her, and sought the destruction of her soul. they were around
her in the morning, at mid-day and evening. but angels were also
present with her, and present with power, for in her memory they found
passages from the word of god, and they abode in them with all their
protecting influence, and helped her to fight the enemies of her soul,
even to their final overthrow. i very much fear that, if her mother
had not filled her memory with stories and precepts from the book of
books, these evil assailants from hell would have overcome in her
great life-battle. but she had angels on her side; and god's angels are
always more powerful than demons. one of these blessed beings can put
ten thousand evil spirits to flight. oh, then, let us make them our
friends! let us prepare dwelling places for them in our hearts, where
they may always abide and shield us from the powers of darkness. they
dwell with us in the divine teachings of this holy book."

and florence, speaking with tender solemnity, lifted the bible from the
table and held it open before madeline.

"fill your mind with its heavenly lessons. let the angels come to you
and make their abode with you in its divine precepts. take it to your
heart, dear madeline!"

madeline stood almost rigid for a moment or two, as if life were
suspended. then, with a gush of tears, she caught at the book and
clasped it passionately to her breast.

"amen! god be praised!" the lips of florence parted, as her wet eyes
sprung upward: there was a low murmur on the air; and these were her
words of thankfulness.

chapter xxiv.

an unexpected revelation.

in the excitement attendant on the restoration of madeline to conscious
life, adele had been forgotten. uncle john was the first to remember
her. it was immediately after the withdrawal of florence with her
charge to the study-room.

"where is the girl?" he asked, suddenly glancing around.

no one could answer the question.

"did you leave her in your chamber?"

uncle john spoke to his niece.

"i do not think she is there," replied mrs. dainty.

"i hope she has not left the house," said uncle john. there was concern
in his voice, and he moved, as he spoke, toward the door. "we are
largely in her debt, and she, i think, needs our protection."

"she shall have it!" mr. dainty spoke with emphasis. "go, madeline, and
see if she has remained in your room."

mrs. dainty went to her chamber.

"not here!" she uttered the words just audibly. a few moments she
stood, her eyes glancing around the apartment, when a low sound, like a
repressed sob, came to her ears. stepping forward, she drew aside one
of the heavy window-curtains. there sat adele, crouching upon a low
ottoman, her face buried in her hands.

"we were afraid you had gone," said mrs. dainty, speaking in a kind
voice, and laying her hand gently on the girl's head.

adele looked up, but did not answer. her singularly beautiful face,
in which the softness of childhood still blended with woman's firmer
outlines, was pale and very sad. mrs. dainty, whose nerves were still
all ajar, felt something like awe steal into her heart as she looked
upon the countenance which was upturned to hers.

just then uncle john, whose anxiety about the young stranger would not
permit him to await the return of his niece, entered the room. his face
brightened as he saw adele.

"ah, my brave girl, you are here. we were afraid you had left the
house," he said, encouragingly.

adele arose, and stood, with timid, downcast look, before mrs. dainty
and mr. fleetwood.

"we owe you more than thanks," said the latter. "the service you have
rendered us is beyond all price. how shall we repay the obligation?"

adele raised her dark eyes and looked steadily into the face of mr.
fleetwood. there was a strange depth and beauty in those eyes, and
something mournful and pleading. mr. fleetwood felt their appeal.

"what is your name?" he asked.

"adele," replied the girl.

"adele—what?"

a slight flush came into her face; but she did not answer until after a
silence of several moments. she then said,—

"adele weir."

"do you wish to return to your mother?"

this question disturbed the girl. there was evidently a strong mental
conflict.

"if mother was as she used to be. but——"

the feelings of adele overmastered her, and she again covered her face.
shuddering sobs almost convulsed her frame. they were not loud, but
repressed as if by the whole strength of her will.

"if mother was as she used to be." self-possession was restored, after
a brief struggle. "but she is not, and i am afraid never will be.
since she became a medium, she has not been like my mother of old. the
spirits tell her a great many strange things, and she believes all,
and does just what they say. oh, dear! it is dreadful! i have not had
a happy moment since the knockings, and writings, and strange doings
began. and i don't like the people who come to our house. some of
them, i know, are not good. there's a mr. dyer. his heart is full of
wickedness, i am sure, for none but a wicked man ever had such greedy
eyes. i was not afraid of him, but more of myself, when he came near
me. i felt as if i would like to kill him."

"did he ever offer you an insult?" asked mr. fleetwood.

"once."

"what of it?"

"i rebuked him with such strong words that he seemed frightened for a
moment. i don't know how i looked: it might have been murder, for i
felt it."

adele had grown excited.

"who else visit at your mothers house?" further inquired mr. fleetwood.

"oh, a great many people. circles meet there every night, and sometimes
every day. but i never saw any good that came of it all. the spirits
tell strange things, but i can't see that any one is made better.
mother hasn't been made better, i know. i am afraid her right reason
is gone. when i was a very little girl, she belonged to the church,
and used to read the bible a great deal. she always read it aloud when
i was with her; and so i got my thoughts full of verses and stories,
until i could say almost chapters by heart. but mother believes now
that spirits are making a higher revelation than the bible, and that
its teachings are of but small account in comparison. i am afraid
that if the spirits were to tell her to do almost any thing that is
forbidden in the bible, she would do it. isn't it dreadful?"

"dreadful indeed!" said mr. fleetwood. "but you believe in the bible?"

"oh, yes,—yes! at first they put me to sleep, and tried to make a
medium of me. i believe that i did write and talk some. but when i got
back into my real self again i had such awful feelings that i was sure
it must be wrong. and so i prayed god to teach and help me. and i think
he did. their power over me grew less and less; and at last i was able
to throw it all off. oh, sir, i do not think it would be right for me
to go back again."

"you must not return," answered mr. fleetwood, positively. "god heard
your prayer, verily, and has granted you a deliverance."

the lashes of the girl's eyes fell slowly down upon her cheeks, and
there came into her face a meek, sad, yet thankful, expression.

"you will remain here for the present," said mr. fleetwood. "to-morrow
we will talk over your future, and decide what is best to be done.
think of us as your true friends, and fully depend upon us for
protection. if your heart is right, adele,—that is, if you wish to be
and to do right,—you have nothing to fear, and every thing to hope."

"i have no other desire!" was the tearful answer.

dusky night was beginning to weave her web of darkness. shadows were
gathering in the rooms: the stillness of twilight came stealing down
upon sense and feeling. half an hour later, and the family were
gathered at the tea-table. there were mr. and mrs. dainty, uncle john
fleetwood, agnes, madeline, and george.

"what will you have, dear?" said mr. dainty, looking toward madeline,
after he had helped uncle john and his oldest daughter, agnes.

"i don't want any thing," she answered, her face slightly reddening
as she spoke, and her eyes turning toward the door, as if she were
expecting some one.

"this toast looks very nice, maddy. let me give you a piece?" mr.
dainty spoke with gentle persuasion.

"can't i eat with miss harper?" and madeline pushed her chair a little
way back from the table.

mrs. dainty's eyes met those of her husband. her face grew troubled and
irresolute; his evinced a puzzled state of mind. uncle john looked at
his niece, and mutely signed for her to say yes.

"if you prefer doing so," answered mrs. dainty, replying to madeline.
"but i would rather have you take tea with us."

consent and objection at the same time only tended to push the child's
mind further away from an even balance. she had stepped back from the
table with a light motion as consent passed her mother's lips, but
stood suddenly still, with a clouded face, at the objection.

"run along, dear," said uncle john, in a cheerful voice. "mother says
yes."

madeline moved a pace or two, and then stopped. her chin was drawn
down, her brow contracted, her lips pouting.

"go, go, dear! mother is willing." mrs. dainty saw her error, and now,
hoping to retrieve it, spoke with pleasant animation.

madeline looked up at her mother, as if in doubt of her sincerity. mrs.
dainty smiled tenderly, and said, in a loving voice,—

"kiss me first, dear."

madeline's face brightened. the kiss was given, and then she went away
with light footsteps.

"i'm going to wait too," said george, sturdily, as he pushed back his
chair. "i'd rather eat with miss harper than with anybody in this
house."

and, before his father could interfere to stop him, young america was
out of the dining-room.

"i don't like that." mrs. dainty looked annoyed.

"children are all democrats," said uncle john.

"i don't wish mine to be democrats," answered mrs. dainty, curtly.

"they will get no harm from eating with florence,—my word for that,—but
good, rather."

"but i don't wish my children to eat with dependants and inferiors."
mrs. dainty drew up her chest and drew down her chin, and looked all
the aristocratic importance she knew how to assume. in the eyes of
uncle john she succeeded in attaining simply the ridiculous. quick
indignation thrilled along every nerve of his body, and cutting rebuke
came instantly to his tongue. but prudence whispered a timely caution
in his ears, and he only said,—

"this is neither the time nor the place for discussing that question,
madeline. but after tea i will have something to suggest."

"on what subject?" inquired mrs. dainty, showing the existence of a no
very amiable mood.

"on that which is of most interest to us all,—the good of these
children," replied uncle john. "what is best for them is best to do. i
think that is a plain proposition."

mrs. dainty was in part disarmed, and so made no answer. but she did
not look as if she were in any better frame of mind. the evening meal
was concluded in silence.

chapter xxv.

a revelation.

mr. and mrs. dainty and uncle john sat alone in the library, into
which they had passed from the tea-table. uncle john referred to the
remark of his niece about the children eating with inferiors. he spoke
with unusual sobriety of manner, and in a voice subdued far below its
ordinary tone; for mr. fleetwood was not only a man of quick feelings,
but one who rarely took special trouble in the way of concealment.

"in what respect, madeline," he asked, in opening the conversation,
"do you think the children will suffer injury by sitting at the same
table with miss harper? don't be annoyed at the question. don't let
feeling obscure your mind. there is much of vital importance involved
in this matter. let us come to its consideration moved solely by a
desire to see what is right. you are the mother of these children, and
your interest in them should be higher than your regard for any social
usage or for any mere prejudice. you spoke just now of florence as an
inferior and a dependant."

uncle john paused.

"well, is she not?" mrs. dainty looked steadily into the eyes of mr.
fleetwood, with an expression that said, my question settles that
proposition.

"in what is she inferior?" asked uncle john.

"your question is absurd, and annoys me," replied mrs. dainty, with
sudden feeling.

"let us put all excitement away, madeline," said the old man. "it
dims perception; and too much is involved just now for either reason
or perception to be under a cloud. my question is not absurd, but one
upon the right answer to which hang, just now, momentous things. in
what, then, is florence inferior to your children? is her mind less
pure, her intellect of a lower range, her tastes less cultivated, her
accomplishments defective in comparison, her love of truth, her honor,
her sense of religious duty, below that of your children?"

"she belongs to a lower grade in society," answered mrs. dainty. "and
she is, in this family, only as a hireling."

"madeline!" (uncle john's feelings betrayed him into more excitement
than he wished to exhibit,) "if you had the wealth of a rothschild, you
could not buy her services! i no money-consideration has led her back
to this house; and i question much whether she will accept pay for any
service she renders."

"then," said mr. dainty, speaking for the first time, "she cannot
remain. i will have no one's labor as a gratuity. we are not paupers!"

"if you can supply her place to the children," was uncle john's reply,
"she will step aside, pleased, i am sure, to retire from a position in
which she is so poorly appreciated."

"i value her in her place," said mr. dainty,—"value her beyond all
price. amount of compensation need be no barrier to her remaining with
the children. but if she demand an equality of position with us the
case is settled at once."

"you put my own thoughts into words," said mrs. dainty.

"she has demanded nothing," replied uncle john,—"suggested nothing,
intimated nothing. i saw her, and told her of our trouble. she came, at
my solicitation, to help us; and her services can never be repaid. her
presence in the house seemed like the presence of an angel. you asked
her to remain, and she consented, but without stipulation. and now, in
the beginning of this restored relationship, it is for us to consider
well the subject and to define her position. the higher we lift her, so
far as external things are concerned, the greater power for good will
she possess. the teacher, guide, and daily companion of our children
should be our social equal. how else can the governess, to whom so high
an office is delegated, lift them up to our level? an inferior the
companion and instructor of our children! think of it. can the coarse,
unskilled hands of an inferior mould into forms of spiritual beauty
the yielding and impressible elements of a child's mind,—that sublime
structure over which angels bend in silent wonder? an inferior for this
work! god forbid! choose, rather, the wisest and the best, and give
her the place of honor in your household. honor her for her gifts and
graces; and your children, honoring her also, will be drawn within the
circle of her heavenly attractions. edward! madeline! there is an angel
in your house to-day. you cannot hold her by the rough hands of gain;
she will not be bribed to stay: let me beg of you, then, to reach out
to her the right hand of a glad welcome. agnes, george, and madeline
have already perceived her true quality. confirm their perceptions
by your free acknowledgment, and her influence over them will be
immeasurably increased."

"what do you mean, uncle john? speak out in plain words," said mrs.
dainty.

"put her upon a social equality with yourself."

"how?"

"if she were your sister, what then?"

"she is not."

"but if she were? then she would sit with you at table; she would meet
your friends; she would be a trusted companion."

"she is _not_ my sister," answered mrs. dainty.

"suppose she were the daughter, or adopted daughter, of a valued friend
or wealthy citizen?"

"that would alter the case. but she is not."

"are you sure?" uncle john's voice fell to a lower tone, and had in it
a quiver of feeling.

"i am sure," said mrs. dainty, with confidence.

uncle john let his eyes sink to the floor. it was plain that there was
something held back in his thoughts.

"i wish," he said at length, almost sadly, "that i could help you to
see below the surface of things,—that you were able to tell gold from
tinsel, worth from its counterfeit. all true value lies in quality.
you know the quality of florence harper. honor the good, then. be
independent in your sphere of life. set the noble example of being
just. you can afford to do so. let it be seen as a new thing, and
worthy of emulation, that in choosing a companion and instructor for
your children you take one worthy to sit by your side and share your
favor and confidence. you cannot see into the mind of an inferior and a
dependant as you can into the mind of one who is regarded as an equal."

but uncle john could not lift the minds of mr. and mrs. dainty up into
the clear-seeing region that his own occupied.

"it is all in vain to press that view," said his niece. "there are
certain social distinctions that must be maintained. as to miss harper,
if her presence as a governess in our family is to be at the cost of
your constant interference in the matter of position, i shall be driven
to the necessity of dismissing her from my service."

the little head of mrs. dainty balanced itself firmly, and she looked
dignified and composed. but she was not prepared for the change that
instantly appeared in uncle john's manner. he stood up very erect, with
a firm, decided manner, and said, like a man in earnest,—

"you will not, i presume, reverse your present decision?"

"i will not," replied the lady.

"then florence cannot remain." mr. fleetwood spoke as by authority.

"i can't see," said mrs. dainty, "that you have any right to control
her movements."

"the time is coming, mayhap, when you will see. for the sake of your
dear children,"—the old man's voice became unsteady,—"whom i love, with
all their faults, almost as well as if they were my own, i consented
to let florence take a position in your family that you regard as an
inferior one——"

"_you_ consented!" interrupted the niece, with some asperity and some
surprise.

"yes, i consented,—or rather, constrained her to the act."

"you! what is the meaning of this, uncle john? what did you know of
florence harper before she came into this house?"

"enough to make me class her with the best and noblest of women! and
her conduct here has only confirmed this estimate of her character."

"i wish you would speak out more plainly, uncle john." the haughty
manner of mrs. dainty was breaking down.

"her mother's maiden name was florence williams," said the old man, in
a low, quiet voice.

mrs. dainty's face showed a slight pallor.

"you remember her?"

"yes."

"the daughter is as pure and true, as refined and accomplished, as
was her mother. now you understand me. in heart, she is my next akin.
if i were her father, i could not love her more. the indignities she
has suffered in this house, and at your hands, madeline, have cut me
sharply, and they pain, even now, like freshly-opened wounds. it will
be hard for me either to forget or forgive them, for they struck like
arrows, in tenderest places."

mrs. dainty was speechless with surprise, and the pallor of her
countenance increased. mr. dainty ventured no remark.

"i did not wish to make this revelation now," said mr. fleetwood. "but
you have forced it upon me. my hope was that you would be clear-seeing
enough to comprehend her true character, and give her a place by your
side because she was worthy to sit there. i thought that you would
be able to comprehend the force of what i said just now about the
importance of making your children's trusted companion and instructor
your social equal, in order that she might all the while be lifting
them up toward the elevated position you desired them to occupy. but
pride obscured true perception. and so i have been forced to an earlier
declaration than i desired of my adopted daughter's true relation."

"adopted daughter!" mrs. dainty looked confounded.

"even so, madeline. even so! and, as i have said, if she were my own
child i could not love her more tenderly. true, wise, noble-hearted,
self-abnegating girl! to me it is a cause of wonder that your eyes were
not able to see the angel in your house."

"i am bewildered, uncle john," said mrs. dainty, greatly subdued.
"leave me now, that i may collect my thoughts."

"as you collect them," replied mr. fleetwood, "i pray you to examine
each with the closest care. only true thoughts lead to right actions.
let there be no error in your summing up,—no fatal defect in your
conclusions. there are two paths diverging before you: madeline,
spoiled child of a dear sister! beware, lest you take the wrong one!"

and he went, in evident agitation, from the room.

chapter xxvi.

reviewing the matter.

"that alters the case," mrs. dainty spoke suggestively, raising her
eyes from the floor, and looking at her husband. it was nearly five
minutes after uncle john had left the library.

"yes, that alters the case," was the half-dreamy response of mr.
dainty. "that alters the case," he repeated, and then relapsed into
silence.

so far they were agreed.

"that artful girl——"

mrs. dainty paused, for she was not entirely certain in regard to her
husband's present estimate of miss harper.

"do you think her artful?" inquired mr. dainty looking at his wife.

"see what influence she has gained over uncle john."

"that may be explained on other grounds," said mr. dainty.

"what are they?"

"he has himself referred to them."

"i thought he had forgotten florence williams years ago, or that, if he
remembered her at all, it was with indifference or dislike. she jilted
him meanly. but i was always glad of it."

"madeline," said mr. dainty, speaking in a decided way, "we cannot
change the present condition of things: that each of us may see at a
glance. and the question for us to ponder is, can we afford to let our
feelings rule, and so break with uncle john? there is no use in beating
around the bush. no use in fretting ourselves. the horns of our dilemma
are visible as the sun at noonday, and we must make our election. uncle
john has made his: that is certain."

"and do you really think he will give us and our children up for that
girl?" said mrs. dainty.

"i am sure of it. did you not see how he was moved when he said that
he loved her as if she were his own child? i marked it well. i have
seen him disturbed a hundred times in my life, but never as he was this
evening."

mrs. dainty sighed deeply.

"we shall have to humor him," said mr. dainty.

"and let that upstart triumph over me!" mrs. dainty burst into tears.
pride could not endure the thought.

"are you not prejudiced against her, madeline? she has never seemed to
me presuming."

before mrs. dainty could reply, the library-door was pushed open, and
madeline came gliding in. from her manner it was plain that she had
come to make a request, and also plain that she was in doubt as to its
reception.

"mother," she said, as she paused a few steps from mrs. dainty.

"well, dear?"

"can't i——" the child hesitated, and her face colored.

"say on, dear."

"can't i sleep with miss harper?"

a strongly-uttered negative was on the lip of mrs. dainty, when a
warning look and gesture from her husband forced her to keep silence.

"can't i, mother?" urged the child. "say yes. do, mother!"

madeline was unusually earnest.

"why do you wish to sleep with miss harper?" asked her father.

"oh, because she is good, and i love her."

"don't you love sister agnes?"

"yes, i love her." the tone of madeline's voice fell.

"isn't she good?"

"not like miss harper."

"not like miss harper?"

"no."

"what is the difference, darling?" and mr. dainty, interested in spite
of himself, drew an arm around madeline and pressed her to his side.

"god has made her good," said the child, speaking low and reverently.

this answer sent a strange thrill through the heart of mrs. dainty. the
father asked no other question.

"can't i sleep with her to-night, mother? say yes, just for to-night."

"yes, for to-night," answered mrs. dainty, speaking as one constrained.

madeline threw her arms around her mother's neck, and, kissing her,
said, in a light, fluttering voice,—

"oh, i'm so glad!" then she flew away, like a happy bird in the warm
spring sunshine.

"there is one thing very certain, madeline," said mr. dainty, as
the child vanished from the room: "miss harper's influence upon the
children is good, and for their sakes, if no other considerations were
urged, we had better let uncle john have his way. we can tolerate her."

mrs. dainty shook her head.

"toleration is not going to do," she answered. "entire social equality
is demanded; and nothing less will satisfy either of them."

"i am not sure that miss harper has demanded any thing. uncle john said
she had not, and that she was here only upon his strong solicitation.
it is barely possible, madeline, that you have misunderstood her from
the beginning. at least, one thing is now certain. her social position
will be changed by uncle john's formal adoption. she will be lifted to
our level, and society will recognise her. so far we will be all right
with the world."

"there is something in that," said mrs. dainty, a trifle softened. "but
will she remain as governess to the children?"

"we can sink the word ‘governess.' let her be their companion and
instructor."

"only another name for the same thing," remarked mrs. dainty. "the
position is menial."

"i have thought differently, since uncle john's remarks a little while
ago," said mr. dainty. "they struck me as having great force."

"what did he say? i was so excited and outraged that i scarcely
comprehended him."

"he said that the teacher, guide, and companion of our children must be
socially equal, or she cannot lift them up to our level. and he asked,
with to me startling emphasis, ‘can the coarse, unskilled hands of an
inferior mould into forms of spiritual beauty the ductile elements of
a child's mind,—that sublime creation over which angels bend in silent
wonder?' ‘choose,' he added, ‘the wisest and the best; and give her
the place of honor in your household.' there is force in that view of
the question, madeline,—great force; and our sad experience with mrs.
jeckyl should be felt as a solemn warning. if menials and inferiors are
to be instructors of our children, will they not deprave their tastes
instead of elevating them? can an impure fountain send forth sweet
waters? we cannot gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles."

mrs. dainty sat with her eyes cast down, and a thoughtful, sober
expression on her face.

"for the sake of our children," she said, looking up, after the lapse
of some moments, "i ought to be willing to do almost any thing. but
this is a hard requirement."

"i do not believe," answered mr. dainty, "that miss harper will ever
intrude herself offensively upon us. in no instance since she has been
in our house have i observed the slightest tendency in that direction."

"i have had better opportunities for observation," was the reply, "and
read her deportment somewhat differently. why, if she were to the very
manor born, she could not bear herself with greater ease nor show a
higher self-possession. there is the tone and carriage about her of one
who acknowledges no superior. it is this in the girl that has always
annoyed me."

"you may have looked through a distorting medium," said mr. dainty.

"it is possible," was answered, in a subdued voice. and then another
long silence followed. it was broken in upon by the entrance of agnes,
their oldest daughter. she pushed the door open quietly, and, seeing
her father and mother alone, was about retiring, when the former said,—

"come in, daughter."

"i only wanted a book," remarked agnes.

"come and sit down here. i have something to say to you about miss
harper," added mr. dainty.

agnes looked curiously at her father.

"what about miss harper?" she asked, as she drew a chair to his side.

"you like her?" mr. dainty spoke in a tone of inquiry.

"oh, yes, father." the answer was warmly uttered.

"why?"

"because she is kind and good."

"do you wish her to remain here?"

"i wouldn't have her go away for all the world!" said agnes, speaking
with strong emphasis.

"why not?"

"what would become of madeline?" was the earnestly-spoken inquiry.

"of madeline?" both mr. and mrs. dainty looked with surprise at agnes.

"yes: that dreadful woman would get her again. maddy would steal off,
as she did before. oh, father, don't let miss harper go away! she's the
only one who can get along with sister now. she is so wise, so good, so
loving, and so patient. i looked at her a little while ago, as she sat
reading in the bible to madeline, and thought her face shone like that
of an angel. i wished then that she were my sister, instead of only our
governess. dear father, i think miss harper must have been born a true
lady."

"agnes," said mr. dainty, after musing for some moments, "uncle john
knew her mother."

"did he?" the face of agnes brightened.

"yes: he knew her a great many years ago."

"then he had seen miss harper before she came here?"

"yes; and it was because he had faith in her goodness and intelligence
that he was so desirous to have her remain as your governess. we had
no knowledge of all this when she came here, but he told us about it
this evening. and now she is going to be one of us; that is, she will
be as our daughter and your elder sister."

"how glad i am! how glad i am!" exclaimed agnes, striking her hands
together, while tears filled her eyes. "but, mother, you don't say any
thing!" and she stood up and looked earnestly into her mother's face.

"can you accept her as an equal?" asked mrs. dainty, almost coldly.

"she is wiser and better than i am," replied agnes, humbly. "if she
will accept me as a sister, my heart will yield to her joyfully. dear
mother, take her into favor and love, for she is worthy."

"leave us now, daughter," said mrs. dainty, in a softened voice. "we
will talk about this another time."

and agnes, after kissing her mother affectionately, withdrew from the
library.

"the thing is inevitable." mrs. dainty was not by any means reconciled,
as both tone and manner indicated.

"but easy."

"easy?"

"yes, and may be accepted gracefully. let us be thankful that miss
harper is not a proud, selfish, designing girl, whose first effort
would be to produce alienation between us and mr. fleetwood."

the thoughts of mrs. dainty reverted at once to the insolent manner in
which she had conducted herself toward miss harper, and her efforts to
degrade her in the family; and a wave of apprehension swept across her
selfish heart.

"but," continued mr. dainty, "of this i do not imagine there is any
thing to fear. miss harper i regard as above suspicion. there is no
doubt of her being able to influence your uncle against us if she
should be so inclined. let us act wisely, and not produce in her that
inclination. madeline, you see as clearly as i do the doubtful position
we now occupy. the tables are suddenly turned upon us, and we are
to-day in the power of an obscure young girl upon whom we have looked
down as the humble governess of our children. it is no use to strive
against the inevitable. we must either accept or reject her. if the
former, it will have to be done heartily. neither coldness nor reserve
will answer. miss harper is clear-seeing, sensitive, and high-spirited.
her relation to mr. fleetwood gives her a position of equality, and any
attempt on your part to degrade her, in even the slightest thing, will
be felt and resented by both."

"i see; i see," answered mrs. dainty, moodily. "but, when a thing
has to be done, only fools hesitate. i will discipline my feelings
to-night, and to-morrow put on toward this usurping girl a new
exterior. don't fear but that i shall play my part."

"it may cost you a struggle," said her husband, "but the strife will
soon be over. i hope much from her gentle nature, and much from her
clear perception of right. she will not, i am sure, take a mean
advantage of this great diversion in her favor."

"time will show," was the almost sullen response.

chapter xxvii.

getting right.

no word of caution had been spoken in the ears of agnes by either her
father or her mother; and so, with a heart full of joy at the news
she had heard, she ran to the chamber where florence was alone with
madeline, and, throwing her arms around her neck, kissed her, and said,—

"dear sister! dear sister!"

florence returned the embrace, and kissed agnes tenderly.

"dear sister!" murmured the excited girl, again pressing her lips to
the cheek of miss harper.

"i am your true friend, agnes," said the young governess, calmly—"your
true and loving friend."

"be nearer than a friend; even as a sister. father says that now you
are to be as a daughter in the house. uncle john has told him all. oh,
i am so glad! so glad!"

the face of miss harper grew pale, and she sat very still for some
moments.

"maybe i shouldn't have told you," said agnes, looking concerned. "but
my heart was so full i could not help it."

"where is your mother?" asked florence, after a pause.

"in the library, with father," replied agnes.

"will you remain for a little while with madeline? i wish to see your
mother. you will stay with your sister, dear, until i come back?" and
she stooped over madeline.

"you won't stay long, will you?"

"no. i will return soon." and she arose and left the chamber.

since the remark of mrs. dainty, with which the preceding chapter
closed, no words had passed between her and her husband. they were
still sitting in the library, when the door was pushed quietly open,
and the subject of their recent conversation entered. a glance at her
almost pale face showed that her feelings were strongly agitated. her
manner, as she crossed the room toward mrs. dainty, was subdued and
respectful. the latter rose as florence approached her. the struggle
with herself was powerful, but brief. suddenly her cold face was broken
by rippling smiles, and, with a warmth of tone and manner that was
remarkable, considering the real state of her feelings, she said,
grasping the young girl's hand, and kissing her,—

"we have heard all, dear miss harper, and take you to our home and
hearts. be to us as a daughter, and to our children, who love you, as
an elder sister."

"welcome! thrice welcome!" said mr. dainty, offering his hand.

florence was so much overcome by this unexpected reception that she was
unable to reply. her face remained pale and strongly agitated. before
self-control was regained, mr. fleetwood entered the library.

"see, uncle john," cried mrs. dainty; "we have already taken this dear,
good girl into our love and confidence. she shall be as our daughter."

mr. fleetwood was taken by surprise. he stood still for a moment or
two, half bewildered. then, comprehending the scene, he advanced to
florence, and, drawing an arm around her, said, with much feeling,—

"the trial is over, dear child! there are no more rough paths for your
tender feet."

and he pressed his lips against her pure forehead. she could bear up
under the weight of emotion no longer. sobs convulsed her, and, as
tears poured over her cheeks, she hid her face upon the old man's
breast and wept passionately. even the worldly, calculating heart of
mrs. dainty was touched, and mr. dainty drew his hand quickly across
his eyes to dash away the blinding drops.

"i promised madeline to return very soon." florence was the first to
gain entire self-control. she spoke in a low but steady voice, as she
looked up. "and now i must go back to her. i need not say that my heart
is deeply touched by this unexpected occurrence. you offer more than i
have any right to claim,—more than i desire. let me still be to your
children as in the beginning. i came as their teacher; i have learned
to love them; i am sure that i can do them good."

"the children's teacher, and the mother's friend!" said mrs. dainty,
whose feelings were taking a higher tone. she saw herself in the right
path, although by constraint, and felt that the way before her was
easier to walk in than she had dared to hope.

"yes,—the mother's friend," mr. fleetwood spoke slowly and with
emphasis; "for none else is worthy to be the children's instructor,
companion, and guide."

while he was yet speaking, florence retired from the room.

"you have done well, madeline," added mr. fleetwood, as the door
closed on florence, "and better a great deal than i had reason to
expect. in bending down to one like miss harper, and raising her up
to the social level you occupy, there is no loss on your part, while
the sphere of life in which you move gains largely by an accession of
virtue, intelligence, refined taste, and womanly self-reliance. depend
upon it, madeline, the benefit is largely in your favor. florence will
give more of good than she receives."

"she is certainly a remarkable girl," said mr. dainty. "in our late
trouble she exhibited qualities that now excite my admiration. if our
dear lost child had been her own sister, she could not have pursued the
search with greater assiduity. we owe her more than we can ever repay."

"and there is a work," replied mr. fleetwood, speaking in a tone of
unusual seriousness, "which, if she have the wisdom to execute, will
lay us under still higher obligations."

uncle john paused. mr. and mrs. dainty looked at him inquiringly.

"maddy is changed."

he paused again,—then added,—

"and there is a fearful mystery connected with the change. we trace its
beginning from the hour that demon in human guise entered our home,
and let the glare of her evil eye fall upon the child. she gained, by
some infernal art, control over the will of that child, and led her off
a captive, powerless to resist. thank god, we have rescued her, so far
as the body is concerned. but the thraldom went far below the visible
and the external. there is yet a spell upon her life,—a spell that must
be broken; and i have no hope, except in florence harper!"

a shadow of fear settled on the face of mrs. dainty.

"it is wonderful," continued uncle john, "with what wise caution miss
harper is already acting toward maddy. would you believe it? the child
not only refused to let florence read to her from the bible, but
actually sought to destroy the book! and yet the good girl was not
turned aside from her holy purpose, but lured the perverse one into the
right way. in the end, maddy listened with deep interest while florence
read of the saviour's birth. wise, loving, true-hearted girl! she is
the angel in our house, madeline! fail not to honor the heavenly guest.
she has begun right; let us give her all possible aid, so that the
angel may triumph over the demon."

chapter xxviii.

conclusion.

on the next day adele weir was taken by mr. fleetwood and florence to
the house of mrs. elder. the good lady, when she clearly understood the
case, and read something of the girl's character and state of mind, did
not hesitate about receiving her, and adele accepted the proffered home
and refuge with tearful gratitude.

mr. fleetwood and florence returned together. as they drew near the
house of mr. dainty, they saw a woman ascend the steps and ring the
bell. before they came up, the door was opened and the woman entered.

"who is that?" asked mr. fleetwood.

"if my eyes do not deceive me," was the reply of florence, "it is the
mother of adele weir."

"no! she would hardly dare venture here."

"a mother will dare much for her child," said florence.

they moved forward quickly, and were soon at the door.

"who came in just now?" inquired miss harper, in a low voice.

the waiter shook his head as he answered, "don't know, miss."

"what name did she give?"

"she asked for mrs. dainty, but would not send up her name."

"let us go into the parlor," said mr. fleetwood, in a whisper to
florence. florence looked assent, and the two passed in. a woman
closely veiled sat on one of the sofas.

"mrs. weir!" said florence, speaking with blended surprise and
indignation in the tones of her voice. the veil was drawn aside,
revealing the pale face and glittering black eyes of adele's mother.
her thin lips were firmly set, and the expression of the woman's
countenance was resolute.

"i have come for my child!" she said, in a voice that betrayed much
agitation of mind.

"she is not here," florence replied.

"she was brought here," said the woman, fixing her piercing eyes upon
the face of miss harper.

"she came here to restore to her mother the child a wicked woman
enticed away, and you secreted, making yourself thereby a party to the
crime."

"and is here now?" said mrs. weir.

"no, she is not here," answered florence. "i said that once before."

"then where is she?"

florence turned to mr. fleetwood, and the old gentleman promptly took
her place.

"beyond the reach of your blighting influence, madam," said he, in his
decided way, "and, i trust, forever beyond."

"sir, i will not be robbed of my child!" and the woman started to her
feet, exhibiting not only strong excitement, but a determined spirit.

"your child has fled from you in fear," said mr. fleetwood, assuming a
calmer voice, "and is now, i trust for her sake, entirely beyond your
influence. she has made her election, and, so long as she continues in
her present mind, will have friends to guide and protect her. and now,
madam, let me warn you, in the beginning, against any attempts to annoy
this family. your daughter is not here, and therefore all search for
her in this direction will be fruitless. if you come here again you
will be handed over to the law. and i am not sure that we shall let
you escape as it is. the part you have taken in the concealment of the
child stolen from this house makes you an accomplice in the crime,—you
and the man dyer also."

at the name of dyer the woman started in surprise, and a shade of
alarm came over her pale face.

"mr. dyer has nothing to do with the affairs of my house," she said,
quickly.

"he is known to have been a party in this wicked transaction." mr.
fleetwood spoke sternly and positively. "and i shall get the police on
his track."

mrs. weir manifested still greater disturbance, which encouraged the
old gentleman to continue the assault in that direction.

"see to it, then, both of you!" he continued. "such things are not to
be done in the broad day and passed over as of light account. you will
all of you find, before you are done with this nefarious business, that
you have gone a step too far. mrs. jeckyl has escaped us; but some
one must answer to outraged justice. florence!" mr. fleetwood turned
quickly to miss harper and said, "tell the waiter that i wish to see
him," adding, in a lower key, "it will hardly do to let this woman
escape."

the closing words reached the ears for which they were really intended,
and mrs. weir, as florence turned to leave the parlor, moved toward the
door leading into the passage.

"stay," said mr. fleetwood, speaking to mrs. weir. "don't go yet!"

if he had said "go," instead, she could not have shown a greater
willingness to depart.

"john!" mr. fleetwood called for the waiter, in a loud, imperative
voice.

that was enough. mrs. weir's alarm was complete, and she fled
precipitately from the house.

a few days afterward mr. fleetwood visited the neighborhood in which
she had lived, but found her house vacant, and "to let" on the door.

the task before miss harper was no light one. it required more than a
single victory over the evil spirits who had gained, through disorderly
rites, power in the child's mind, to dispossess them. scarcely a day
passed in which madeline did not relapse into moody states or show a
strangely perverse will. patience, gentleness, loving-kindness, all
were brought into exercise; and sometimes the contest would be long and
painful. but always the angel proved stronger than the demon, and the
tried spirit of the child arose, through divine aid, superior to its
foes.

as weeks and months glided onward, the old tranquil states returned,
and the gentlest and sweetest of all the children was restored to
herself again,—stood clothed and in her right mind. mrs. dainty, from
whose eyes the veil had fallen, now saw the character of florence in
its true light. there had been no intrusions upon her selfish pride,
no humiliating concessions required. a quiet dignity and gentle reserve
had marked the conduct of miss harper from the hour their new relation
began. instead of having to throw up barriers against the too familiar
approaches of an unwelcome inmate, mrs. dainty soon found that she must
court, if she would have, equal intercourse.

with an easy grace and unobtrusive self-possession, miss harper took
her place as one of the family. before a year had passed, even mrs.
dainty had learned to confide in her discretion, to defer to her
judgment in all things relating to the children, and to regard her as
a true friend. mr. fleetwood looked on, a happier man than he had been
for many years. no tenderer love for a daughter was ever born in a
father's heart than that which he felt for the child of his adoption.
and he was very proud of her. as she gradually passed into the refined
and intelligent circles that opened spontaneously to receive her, and
there became an object of unconscious attraction, the old man looked on
with a swelling heart, while admiration blended with love and pride.
and yet he loved her best of all for the daily duties through which
she passed with such an earnest self-devotion. he saw the children
of his weak, vain, worldly-minded niece growing daily more and more
like their guide, companion, and friend. he had loved them from the
beginning for their childish innocence and affection, but love took
now a deeper tone, and gathered strength and emotion from the beauty
of goodness that daily blossomed in their lives, the sweet presage of
fruit in sunny autumn.

of mrs. jeckyl no more was seen or heard. she vanished like an evil
spirit when the sun-rays of truth stream down through the rifted clouds
of error. the shadow of her presence had left a blight on the earth;
but warm sunshine and gentle dews made the soil fruitful again, and
good seeds, planted by careful hands, soon shot up the tender blade
and covered the desert place with greenness. mrs. weir came not again.
the warning of consequences had thoroughly alarmed her, and adele was
permitted to remain under the wise, religious care of mrs. elder. very
deeply had her young life been disturbed by the disorderly influences
to which she had been subjected in her mother's house; and there were
times when the evil spirits who had gained access to her mind found
some of the old avenues unguarded, and flowed in with their sphere of
error, invading even the outer citadel of natural and corporeal life.
but mrs. elder knew wherein lay the power of exorcism. she knew that
as she filled the mind of adele full, as it were, of the precepts and
narratives of the divine word which was "in the beginning," which was
"with god," and which "was god," she would succeed in casting out the
spirits who sought to rule her, and set her freed soul upon the rock of
eternal ages. she did not labor in vain.

and so good triumphed. the angel was stronger than the demon. the human
souls that came forth from god, with god-given freedom of will, were
restored to the orderly life into which they were created, free, as
reason developed, to select, unbiassed by the intrusion of disorderly
spiritual spheres, the paths of life in which they would move through
the world. without such rational freedom, spiritual regeneration is
impossible; and any thing that disturbs such freedom cannot have its
origin in heaven. so we read the doctrine of life; and, so reading it,
we teach.

the end.

stereotyped by l. johnson & co.
philadelphia.

list of valuable and popular books.

dr. livingstone's
travels & researches
of
sixteen years
in the
wilds of south africa

this is a work of thrilling adventures and hair-breadth escapes among
savage beasts and more savage men. dr. livingstone was alone, and
unaided by any white man, traveling with african attendants, among
different tribes and nations, all strange to him, and many of them
hostile, and altogether forming the most astonishing book of travels
the world has ever seen. all acknowledge it is the most readable book
published. price $1.25.

notices of the press.

it abounds in descriptions of strange and wonderful scenes, among
a people and in a country entirely new to the civilized world; and
altogether we regard it as one of the most interesting books issued
within the past year.—_daily democrat, patterson, new jersey._

the subjects treated of are new and strange, and take a deep hold
upon popular feeling. the book is having a great run, and will be
read by every reading man, woman, and child, in this as well as other
lands.—_ashtabula (ohio) telegraph._

those of our readers who would have a delightful book for reading
at any hour, will not be disappointed in this work.—_united states
journal._

this interesting work should be in the hands of every one. its
interesting pages of adventures are full of instruction and
amusement.—_auburn american._

with truth we can say, that seldom is presented to the reading public
a work containing such a vast amount of solid instruction as the one
in question.—_family magazine._

it is a rich and valuable book for the general reader; and the
admirable style in which the publisher has issued it, will commend it
to the favor of thousands.—_christian observer._

this is a valuable work for the general reader, gotten up in beautiful
style. a special interest is given to this volume by the addition of
valuable "historical notices of discoveries in africa." altogether, it
would be difficult to name any work which would more completely meet
the popular taste of our day. those of our friends who have perused
"our" copy, speak very highly of it.—_fort. edward inst. monthly._

the present volume is a beautiful 12mo., of 446 pages, numerously
illustrated, and contains all of the original, except some of the more
dry, scientific details. it is emphatically an edition for the people;
and, judging from the rapid sale with which it is (illegible)ing, it
is fully appreciated by them.—_christian freeman, boston._

t. s. arthur's works.

[the following list of books are all written by t. s. arthur, the
well-known author, of whom it has been said, "_that dying he has not
written a word he would wish to erase_." they are all gotten up in the
best style of binding, and are worthy of a place in every household.]

ten nights in a bar-room,

and

what i saw there.

this powerfully-written work, one of the _best_ by its _popular
author_, has met with an immense sale—ten thousand copies having been
ordered within a month of publication. it is a large 12mo., illustrated
with a beautiful mezzotint engraving, by sartain; printed on fine white
paper, and bound in the best english muslin, gilt back. price $1.00.

the following are a few of the many notices of the press.

powerful and seasonable.—_n. y. independent._

its scenes are painfully graphic, and furnish thrilling arguments for
the temperance cause.—_norton's literary gazette._

written in the author's most forcible and vigorous style.—_lehigh
valley times._

in the "ten nights in a bar-room," some of the consequences of
tavern-keeping, the "sowing of the wind" and "reaping the whirlwind,"
are followed by a "fearful consummation," and the "closing scene,"
presenting pictures of fearful, thrilling interest.—_am. courier._

there is no exaggeration in these pages—they seem to have been filled
up from actual observation.—_philadelphia sun._

we have read it with the most intense interest, and commend it as a
work calculated to do an immense amount of good.—_lancaster express._

we wish that all lovers of bar-rooms and rum would read the book. it
will pay them richly to do so.—_n. y. northern blade._

it is sufficient commendation of this little volume to say that it is
from the graphic pen of t. s. arthur, whose works will be read and
reread long after he has passed away. he is as true to nature, as far
as he attempts to explore it, as shakspeare himself; and his works,
consequently, have an immense popularity.—_new haven palladium._

there are many scenes unequaled for pathos and beauty. the death of
little mary can scarcely be surpassed.—_n. y. home journal._

what can woman do?

12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00

our purpose is to show, in a series of life pictures, what woman can
do, as well for good as for evil. we desire to bring her before you
as a living entity, that you may see her as she is, and comprehend in
some small degree the influence she wields in the world's progress
upward, as well as her power to mar the human soul and drag it down to
perdition, when her own spirit is darkened by evil passions.—_extract
from the preface._

steps toward heaven;

or,

religion in common life.

price,      $1.00

notices of the press.

it panders to the doctrines and tenets of no particular sect, and
will be found an excellent book to place in the hands of young
people.—_savannah georgian._

it is a work well calculated to do good, and to put into the hands of
the youth of the country.—_enquirer._

this work will interest the reader, and at the same time teach lessons
of practical value.—_ch. messenger, vt._

it is designed to show that the beauties and endearments of
christianity are to be developed amid the stern realities of every-day
life.—_vermont messenger._

it is a timely and good book, and should be widely read, especially by
young christians—_central ch. herald, cincinnati._

mr. arthur is already well known as an earnest man, whose object has
been to do his part in spreading the doctrines and teachings of the
christian religion; and in the present volume he urges the necessity
of charity, and endeavors to impress upon the reader the fact that
religion is for daily life, "and cannot be put aside at the tranquil
close of sabbath evenings."—_courier and enquirer._

more decidedly religious in its character than arthur's other works,
though it is neither doctrinal nor sectarian.—_ch. times, chicago._

the pen of t. s. arthur never tires. in this new volume, we perceive
that he is still laboring successfully in producing brief stories,
the aim of which is moral. he says truly, when he declares that
"no special theology is taught in this volume," by which he means,
we suppose, that controverted dogmas are not introduced. his main
point is, "religion, to be of any real use to a man, must come down
into all his daily duties, and regulate his actions by a divine
standard."—_exeter news letter._

no special theology is taught in this volume. it addresses itself to
no particular sect or denomination. it has no aim but to assist men to
grow better, and thence, happier.—_salem gazette._

arthur has produced few more satisfactory books than this.—_atlas and
bee._

the hand without the heart;

or,

the life trials of jessie loring.

price,      $1.00

the point of this story is expressed in the title; and the story
itself is a sharply drawn illustration of the folly and madness of
linking together two immortal souls by the rough chains of selfish
interest, pride, or baser passion. the lesson taught is one of deep
significance; and thousands of hearts will throb in almost wild
response, to the life experiences of jessie loring, who in all the
bitter trials of her unhappy union, swerved not a hair's breadth from
honor, principle, or religious duty, though temptation came in its
most alluring shape. as the type of a true woman, she is worthy to be
embalmed in the memory of every reader.—_southern argus._

the young lady at home.

6 vols. in one.     price, $1.00

arthur's sketches

of

life and character.

an octavo volume of over 400 pages, beautifully illustrated, and bound
in the best english muslin, gilt. price $2.00.

notices of the press.

the present volume, containing more than four hundred finely-printed
octavo pages, is illustrated by splendid engravings, and made
particularly valuable to those who like to "see the face of him they
talk withal," by a correct likeness of the author, finely engraved on
steel.—_neal's gazette._

in the princely mansions of the atlantic merchants, and in the rude
log cabins of the backwoodsmen, the name of arthur is equally known
and cherished as the friend of virtue.—_graham's magazine._

we would not exchange our copy of these sketches, with its story of
"the methodist preacher," for any one of the gilt-edged and embossed
annuals which we have yet seen.—_lady's national magazine._

the first story in the volume, entitled "the methodist preacher, or
hights and shadows in the life of an itinerant," is alone worth the
price of the work.—_evening bulletin._

it is emphatically a splendid work.—_middletown whig._

its worth and cheapness should place it in every person's hands who
desires to read an interesting book.—_odd fellow, boonsboro'._

"the methodist preacher," "seed-time and harvest," "dyed in the wool,"
are full of truth as well as instruction, and any one of them is worth
the whole price of the volume.—_lowell day-star, rev. d. c. eddy,
editor._

there is a fascination about these sketches which so powerfully
interests the reader, that few who commence one of them will
part with it till it is concluded; and they will bear reading
repeatedly.—_norfolk and portsmouth herald._

those who have not perused these model stories have a rich feast in
waiting, and we shall be happy if we can be instrumental in pointing
them to it.—_family visitor, madison, ga._

no library for family reading should be considered complete without
this volume, which is as lively and entertaining in its character, as
it is salutary in its influence.—_n. y. tribune._

the work is beautifully illustrated. those who are at all acquainted
with arthur's writings need hardly be told that the present work is a
prize to whoever possesses it.—_n. y. sun._

we know no better book for the table of any family, whether regarded
for its neat exterior or valuable contents.—_vox populi, lowell._

the name of the author is in itself a sufficient recommendation of the
work.—_lawrence sentinel._

t. s. arthur is one of the best literary writers of the
age.—_watchman, circleville, ohio._

the name alone of the author is a sufficient guarantee to the reading
public of its surpassing merit.—_the argus gallatin, miss._

probably he has not written a line which, dying, he could wish to
erase.—_parkersburg (va.) gazette._

the withered heart.

12mo., with fine mezzotint frontispiece. cloth.      price $1.00

this work has gone through several editions in england although
published but a few weeks, and has had the most flattering notices from
the english press.

lights and shadows of real life.

with an autobiography and portrait of the author. over five hundred
pages, octavo, with fine tinted engravings. price $2.00.

notices of the press.

in this volume may be found a "moral suasion," which cannot but affect
for good all who read. the mechanical execution of the work is very
beautiful throughout.—_new haven palladium._

it is by far the most valuable book ever published of his works,
inasmuch as it is enriched with a very interesting, though brief
autobiography.—_american courier._

no family library is complete without a copy of this book.—_scott's
weekly paper._

no better or worthier present could be made to the young; no offering
more pure, charitable, and practicable could be tendered to those who
are interested in the truly benevolent reforms of the day.—_godey's
lady's book._

the paper, the engravings, the binding, and the literary contents, are
all calculated to make it a favorite.—_penn. inquirer._

this volume cannot be too highly recommended.—_n. y. tribune._

more good has been effected, than by any other single medium that we
know of.—_n. y. sun._

the work should be upon the centre-table of every parent in the
land.—_national temperance magazine._

leaves from the book of human life.

large 12mo. with thirty illustrations and steel plate. price $1.00.

a single story is worth the price charged for the book.—_union,
newburyport, mass._ "it includes some of the best humorous sketches of
the author."

*       *       *       *       *

[the following books are bound in uniform style as "arthur's cottage
library," and are sold in sets, or separately, each volume being
complete in itself. each volume is embellished with a fine mezzotint
engraving.]

the way to prosper.

and other tales.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00.

true riches; or, wealth without wings.

and other tales.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00.

angel of the household.

and other tales.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00

golden grains from life's harvest-field.

bound in gilt back and sides, sheep, with a beautiful mezzotint
engraving. 12mo. price $1.00.

notices of the press.

it is not too much to say, that the golden grains here presented to
the reader, are such as will be productive of a far greater amount of
human happiness than those in search of which so many are willing to
risk domestic peace, health, and even life itself in a distant and
inhospitable region.

these narratives, like all of those which proceed from the same
able pen, are remarkable not only for their entertaining and lively
pictures of actual life, but for their admirable moral tendency.

it is printed in excellent style, and embellished with a mezzotint
engraving. we cordially recommend it to the favor of our
readers.—_godey's lady's magazine._

"arthur's home library."

[the following four volumes contain nearly 500 pages, illustrated
with fine mezzotint engravings. bound in the best manner, and sold
separately or in sets. they have been introduced into the district,
sabbath-school, and other libraries, and are considered one of the
best series of the author.]

three eras in a woman's life.

containing maiden, wife, and mother.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00.

"this, by many, is considered mr. arthur's best work."

tales of married life.

containing lovers and husbands, sweethearts and wives, and married and
single.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00.

"in this volume may be found some valuable hints for wives and
husbands, as well as the young."

tales of domestic life.

containing madeline, the heiress, the martyr wife, and ruined gamester.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00.

"contains several sketches of thrilling interest."

tales of real life.

containing bell martin, pride and principle, mary ellis, family pride,
and alice melville.

cloth, 12mo., with mezzotint engraving,      price $1.00.

"this volume gives the experiences of real life by many who found not
their ideal."

a book of startling interest.

the angel and the demon.

a handsome 12mo. volume. price $1.00.

in this exciting story mr. arthur has taken hold of the reader's
attention with a more than usually vigorous grasp, and keeps him
absorbed to the end of the volume. the book is one of startling
interest. its lessons should be

in the heart of every mother.

onward, with a power of demonstration that makes conviction a
necessity, the author sweeps through his subject, fascinating at every
step. in the union of

thrilling dramatic incident,

with moral lessons of the highest importance, this volume stands forth
pre-eminent among the author's many fine productions.

notices of the press.

a story of much power, imbued with that excellent moral and religious
spirit which pervades all his writings.—_n. y. chronicle._

this volume is among his best productions, and worthy of a place on
every centre-table.—_clarion, pa., banner._

this is a most fascinating book, one which the reader will find it
quite hard to lay aside without reading to the last page.—_albany, n.
y., journal and courier._

the good time coming.

large 12mo., with fine mezzotint frontispiece,      price $1.00.

it is like every thing emanating from that source—worth
reading.—_toledo blade._

it is characterized by "all the excellencies of his style."—_phila.
bulletin._

it is a book the most scrupulous parent may place in the hand of his
child.—_providence transcript._

the old man's bride,                               price $1.00
heart histories and life pictures,                   "    1.00
sparing to spend; or, the loftons and pinkertons,    "    1.00
home scenes,                                         "    1.00

life and memorials

of

daniel webster.

two vols. in one. by gen. s. p. lyman. price $1.00.

extract from preface.

the personal memorials, which compose so large a portion of these
volumes, are from the pen of gen. s. p. lyman, whose intimate and
confidential relations with mr. webster afford a sufficient guarantee
for their authenticity. they are believed by the publisher to embrace
a more copious collection of original and interesting memoranda,
concerning the life and character of the great statesman whose recent
death has created so deep a sense of bereavement throughout the
country, than has hitherto been given to the world.

cook's voyages round the world.

two volumes in one,      price $1.00

